Strategic Communication and
       Foresight (SG.STRAT)

    REPORT ON FIMI THREATS

 3ʳᵈ EEAS Report on
Foreign Information
    Manipulation and
    Interference Threats
    Exposing the architecture of FIMI operations

    March 2025



FOREWORD BY HIGH REPRESENTATIVE/VICE PRESIDENT KAJA KALLAS

Our information space has become a geopolitical battleground.
From the data gathered by the EEAS, last year over eighty
countries and over two hundred organisations were the
targets of attacks from foreign information manipulation
and interference or ‘FIMI’. From the Paris Olympic and
Paralympic games, to the Presidential elections in Moldova,
to the Sahel states of Mali, Niger and Burkina Faso; from
farmers’ protests in Germany to biased material legitimising
Russian economic and military influence in the Middle East,
Africa, the U.S. and parts of Latin America, no sector of
society was spared.

Foreign actors use FIMI to manipulate public opinion, fuel
polarisation, and interfere with democratic processes within
the EU and worldwide. The aim is to destabilise our societies,
damage our democracies, drive wedges between us and
our partners and undermine the EU’s global standing. FIMI
is not merely a tool for disseminating deceptive narratives.
It is an integral part of military operations used by foreign
states to lay the way for kinetic action on the ground. Russia’s
brutal war against Ukraine is the perfect example. Practices
include everything from manipulative behaviour via armies
of bots, AI-generated content and censorship.          FIMI is a
major security threat to the EU. We must not underestimate
the power that this has over us, or the intentions of those
behind it.        Hostile actors also use FIMI against countries
vying for EU membership to derail them from their path
towards the EU, often undermining the EU’s policies and
values in the process.
                                                                 The novelty of this years’ report is the exposure of massive
Against the use of new technologies and the weaponisation        digital arsenals put in place specifically by Russia and
of information by autocratic governments, our approach to        China to conduct their FIMI operations. As we increase
FIMI has evolved. It now focuses more on malign actors,          our fluency in FIMI, the EU is also ramping up its punitive
and understanding how they manipulate and interfere              response. In December 2024, for example, the EU imposed
with our information space. The EU has also put in place         the first ever sanctions for this behaviour. We must continue
more effective policy responses. With the ‘FIMI toolbox’ we      strengthening our defences as we invest in the resilience
increase awareness, raise the resilience of our societies,       of our democracies and those of our partners.
pursue diplomatic action, and take the necessary regulatory
steps. The scale of the threat also requires targeted            Kaja Kallas,
reactions that are closely coordinated with EU institutions,     EU High Representative
EU Member States, and international partners such as             for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
NATO and the G7.                                                 Vice-President of the European Commission




TABLE OF CONTENTS

Foreword by High Representative/Vice President Kaja Kallas......................................................................................... 2

Glossary ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4

Executive summary ..........................................................................................................................................................5

Introduction.......................................................................................................................................................................7

1.    FIMI trends and findings in 2024 ................................................................................................................................9
                    Russia as a FIMI threat actor in 2024 ......................................................................................................................12
                   China as a FIMI threat actor in 2024 ........................................................................................................................13

2.                                                         FIMI EXPOSURE MATRIX: A systematic approach to classifying and attributing FIMI infrastructure ..................... 14
                     The four blocks of the FIMI architecture...................................................................................................................15
                        Building the evidence: Key indicators to track..........................................................................................................16
                          Decoding the criteria for categorising and attributing ...............................................................................................18
                      From classification to strategic responses ...............................................................................................................19

3.                                                Exposing the architecture of FIMI operations: A network analysis of influence operations......................................20
                                                          Cementing the foundations of Russian FIMI infrastructure in Moldova: The opportunistic use of events ................ 29
                                    Echoes of influence: Inside the Russian FIMI machine in Africa..............................................................................32
                    Chinese influence-for-hire operations ......................................................................................................................35

Conclusions ....................................................................................................................................................................38

References .....................................................................................................................................................................40




GLOSSARY

Term             Explanation

FIMI             Foreign Information Manipulation and Interference (FIMI) describes a mostly non-illegal pattern of behaviour that
                 threatens or has the potential to negatively impact values, procedures and political processes. Such activity is
                 manipulative in character and is conducted in an intentional and coordinated manner, by state or non-state actors,
                 including their proxies inside and outside of their own territory¹.

TTP(s)           In the context of FIMI, “Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures” are patterns of behaviour used by threat actors to
                 manipulate the information environment with the intention to deceive. “Tactics” are the operational goals that threat
                 actors are trying to accomplish. “Techniques” are actions through which they try to accomplish them. “Procedures”
                 are the specific combination of techniques across multiple tactics (or stages of an attack) that indicate intent and
                 may be unique for different threat actors.

STIX             The Structured Threat Information Expression (STIX™) language is a data format used to encode and exchange
                 cyber threat intelligence (CTI). It can also be used to share information on FIMI incidents, by breaking them down
                 into their different constitutive elements².

Response         This framework is a systematic way of organising and conceptualising the analysis and response processes to FIMI. It
Framework        merges two workflows: an analytical one providing information on the threat and a response one facilitating the
to FIMI          decision-making process on countermeasures. The Response Framework relies on the assessment of potential risks
Threats          and vulnerabilities extracted from the aggregated knowledge of past investigations. Each organisation should adapt its
                 strategy and organise preventive and reactive activities before, while and after an incident occurs.

Kill Chain       The term “kill chain” describes an end-to-end process, or the entire chain of events, that is required to perform a
                 successful attack. Once an attack is understood and deconstructed into discrete phases, it allows defenders to map
                 potential countermeasures against each one of these phases³.

FIMI Toolbox     The Strategic Compass, adopted in March 2022 by the EU, sets out a plan of action for strengthening the EU’s
                 security and defence policy by 2030. One of the aspects covered in terms of security policy is the development of
                 a Toolbox to counter Foreign Information Manipulation and Interference⁴.The toolbox is a catalogue of instruments,
                 many of which are in constant implementation, to tackle and respond to FIMI operations.

Threat actor     An organisation, a government, an individual or a group that poses a security risk by engaging in malicious activities,
                 such as FIMI campaigns, cyberattacks or other harmful actions. Threat actors can have different motives, including
                 financial gain, political influence, espionage or disruption.

Coordinated      This involves organised, deliberate and manipulative efforts to mislead audiences by using multiple fake or
Inauthentic      inauthentic accounts. Generally, it includes networks of accounts and pages working together to spread particular
Behaviour        messages or carry out specific actions while concealing their nature. CIB operations rely on the extensive use of
(CIB)            manipulative tactics and techniques.

Exposure         The action of making public FIMI activities that were previously hidden or not widely known. Exposing FIMI activities
                 requires meticulous forensic open source investigations and analysis of the repetitive use of tactics and techniques
                 employed to conduct attacks, as well as of the channels’ role and degree of connection to a threat actor. These FIMI
                 activities are not yet attributed to a threat actor. However, exposure and attribution can be combined not only to reveal
                 FIMI activities but also to identify the threat actor responsible for them.

Attribution      The identification of the threat actor responsible for FIMI operations. If the identification of the threat actor is based
                 on the analysis of technical, behavioural and open source evidence, the final decision is political, as attribution can
                 have legal and policy implications for how FIMI activities are handled and responded to.

Network          A visual representation of interconnected entities within a set data sample. It consists of two primary components,
graph            nodes and edges. Nodes represent individual entities such as channels and websites, whereas the edges depict
                 the relationships or connections between these nodes. Network graphs are valuable for FIMI analysis, providing a
                 holistic view of complex clusters and their interdependencies.




    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The 3ʳᵈ EEAS Report on Foreign Information
Manipulation and Interference (FIMI) Threats
introduces a novel analytical tool – the FIMI
Exposure Matrix – which can be readily deployed in
efforts to counter the attempts by malign foreign actors
to manipulate and interfere in the information space of
the European Union and democracies across the world.

The Matrix provides an instrument to reveal
the comprehensive and multi-layered digital
architecture put into place by authoritarian regimes
such as Russia and China to conduct their FIMI
operations. By shedding light on the complex interplay
of the network of overt and covert online media outlets
and channels used in these malign activities, the Matrix
empowers practitioners and policy-makers to better
understand and identify the connections between
online channels and FIMI actors. The insights provided
by this tool can not only contribute to increase
public awareness of the FIMI threat, but crucially,
provide a basis for attribution and enable measures
which seek to hold threat actors accountable for
their actions.

Applying the Matrix to a sample of 505 FIMI incidents
collected and analysed in 2024, involving some
38,000 channels, the report reveals the vast online
infrastructure Russia and China use for their FIMI
activities. It spans multiple platforms and geographical
areas, highlighting the scale and complexity of the
FIMI threat to democracies worldwide. It demonstrates
how official and attributed channels are only the
tip of the iceberg of FIMI activities. These interact
with an extensive covert network of state-linked
channels hidden from the public eye. The report
further shows important differences in the modus
operandi of Russian and Chinese FIMI operations, but
also how they at times interact to mutually amplify and
reinforce anti-Western messaging.

Based on the sample, the report presents an overview
of key FIMI trends in 2024. FIMI incidents have targeted
90 different countries, underscoring the global
nature of the FIMI threat. As in 2023, Ukraine remains
the main victim of FIMI attacks, accounting for almost
half of the recorded incidents, while France, Germany,
Moldova and Sub-Saharan Africa, notably the Sahel,
were also heavily targeted.

Elections were a key target of FIMI attacks in a year
where over half of the world’s voting population went
to the polls – with 42 Russian FIMI attempts recorded
during the June European Electionsbringing important
lessons for securing the integrity of future electoral
processes. FIMI attacks were not limited to countries
but also targeted organisations and individuals. The EU,
NATO, independent media outlets and FIMI defenders
were among the most attacked.

Social media platforms remained the hotbed of FIMI
activity, with X alone accounting for 88% of the detected
activity. Key tactics, techniques and procedures (TTPs)
included bot networks and coordinated inauthentic
behaviour, as well as the impersonation and creation
of inauthentic news websites, such as in the so-called
Doppelgänger Campaign. Advances in the use of
generative Artificial Intelligence provided threat actors
with a low-cost option to create inauthentic content and
increase the scale of FIMI activities.

The report provides case studies on Russian campaigns
in Moldova and Africa and one operation originating
from China, illustrating how FIMI networks tailor their
strategies to geopolitical shifts and local contexts.

The 3ʳᵈ EEAS Report on FIMI Threats offers solutions
to empower the community of FIMI defenders in
moving towards anticipatory analysis to prevent and
counter FIMI threats⁵. It offers insights for policy makers
in shaping and taking decisions when it comes to FIMI
threat actors, while providing civil society with further
tools to strengthen research and empower citizens in
understanding how FIMI can affect democratic processes.

The report builds on the work presented in two previous
EEAS publications: The 1ˢᵗ report on FIMI Threats⁶, which
introduced a Methodology for a standardised approach
to investigating FIMI activities; and the 2ⁿᵈ report on FIMI
Threats⁷, which put forward a Response Framework for
evidence-based responses to FIMI.



Disclaimer: The empirical data mentioned in this report is based on the strategic FIMI monitoring efforts of the
EEAS. It reflects patterns seen in known outlets related to overt Foreign Information Manipulation and Interference
(FIMI) or independently attributed operations by selected actors and on priority issues of the EEAS. The incidents
reflected in this report have been encoded in STIXᵀᴹ format. The evidence presented in this report serves illustrative
purposes and should not be used to draw conclusions about general trends in FIMI, as it reflects only a limited
subset of threat actors’ activity.



   INTRODUCTION

Over the past ten years, the European External Action
Service (EEAS) has been actively engaged in global
efforts to counter Foreign Information Manipulation and
Interference (FIMI), together with other partners. The EEAS
defined the very concept of FIMI and then developed a
toolbox to respond to this security threat, with the aim
of protecting the integrity of the information environment
and strengthening democratic resilience. Back in March
2015, the East StratCom Task Force (ESTF) was
set up to address Russia’s ongoing disinformation
campaigns⁸. Since then, the EEAS has expanded the
regional coverage of its counter-FIMI efforts, has pioneered
data-driven analysis, working in close cooperation with
EU institutions, and has fostered international cooperation
with the EU Member States and key partners, such as G7
and NATO, so as to shape collective understanding of and
responses to FIMI.

Today, this work is more critical than ever. The geopolitical
environment has become increasingly hostile, marked
by an aggressive use of information manipulation as
part of a hybrid arsenal to influence political and societal
developments. FIMI threat actors systematically exploit
key global events to expand their influence. Moreover,
ongoing wars and geopolitical tensions have amplified these
challenges, creating new vulnerabilities that demand urgent
countermeasures.
of platform-based ideological communities presents new
challenges. On the one hand, it enables threat actors
to target distinct audiences more effectively, reinforcing
radicalisation and polarisation. On the other, it complicates
efforts to implement consistent regulatory frameworks such
as the Digital Services Act designed to make platforms
transparent and accountable.

In this rapidly shifting context, the work to understand
and address FIMI remains not only relevant but
indispensable. Through its annual reports on FIMI threats,
the EEAS contributes to ongoing efforts to address FIMI,
supports the development of innovative solutions for the
FIMI defender community, and fosters collaboration to
tackle this universal threat.

Each report builds on the insights and tools introduced in
previous editions, progressively enhancing the EU’s capacity
to address the evolving landscape of FIMI threats. These
reports focus on distinct, interconnected aspects of the
fight against FIMI:

■  How to analyse? The 1ˢᵗ report on FIMI Threats⁹
   introduced the FIMI Methodology, a groundbreaking
   analytical framework that established a standardised
   approach for investigating FIMI activities based on open
   source analysis.

    In 2024, half of the voting-age population in the world             ■  How to counter? The 2ⁿᵈ report on FIMI Threats¹⁰
    were called on to exercise their democratic rights in                  put forward a Response Framework to FIMI threats,
    numerous elections. With further crucial elections in 2025,            detailing strategies for coordinated responses among the
    we need to continue being attentive and proactive to                   EU and its partners, including against FIMI campaigns
    defend democratic institutions and the integrity of the                targeting democratic processes like elections.
    information environment.
                                                                        ■  How to expose and attribute operations? This 3ʳᵈ
    The environment is also more hostile for researchers,                  report on FIMI Threats presents the FIMI Exposure
    civil society organisations and information integrity                  Matrix, an instrument to reveal the connections between
    advocates. The FIMI defender community has to work in                  digital channels used in FIMI activities and the underlying
    a deteriorating environment, facing greater barriers to data           infrastructure of threat actors. This model is key for
    access, less political and financial support, and increased            exposing FIMI operations, ensuring precise terminology for
    questioning of their work. As a result, the ability to implement       threat actors’ activities, and enabling the implementation
    a whole-of-society approach to countering FIMI – the only              of responses that are grounded in data and evidence.
    approach that is viable – is under severe pressure.
                                                                        In a context of increased hostility, anticipatory analysis
    The digital landscape is undergoing a profound transformation.      to prevent and manage risks is essential¹¹. Better
    Social media platforms are giving way to a highly fragmented        understanding the landscape is key to anticipating future
    online ecosystem, where user-driven segmentation                    threats, and this report helps to do exactly that. Building
    fosters ideological echo chambers. This proliferation               on previous work, it represents a significant step forward




in the EEAS’s ongoing analysis of FIMI threats, offering
a comprehensive and detailed assessment of how FIMI
operations are build and interconnected.

This report is structured into three sections:
Through network analysis, it maps the interactions
between different types of networks across multiple
platforms. Case studies on Moldova and Africa illustrate
how Russia tailors its strategies to geopolitical and local
political shifts.

    ■  FIMI trends and findings in 2024: This section presents           A key contribution of this report is the reinforcement of FIMI
       key figures from the year, analysing the activities of 38,000     analysis within the broader context of security and
       channels involved in 505 FIMI incidents. It includes a            hybrid threats. By exposing the interplay between overt and
       special focus on Russia’s and China’s activities and              covert FIMI operations, as well as the interactions between
       examines the adaptation of FIMI operations to different           attributed and non-attributed infrastructures, it demonstrates
       and emerging digital environments.                                that FIMI activities are integrated into larger geopolitical
                                                                         strategies. Moreover, while other reports detail specific
    ■  FIMI Exposure Matrix: The second chapter outlines                 operations, this report provides an aggregated overview,
       the model used to categorise sources based on their               offering a comprehensive perspective. The proposals outlined
       technical and behavioural connections to threat actors.           in this report seek to bridge existing gaps and empower
                                                                         the FIMI defenders community. Through data-driven
    ■  The architecture of FIMI operations: Using the FIMI               analysis, the report aims to enhance understanding of FIMI
       Exposure Matrix, this investigation unveils how threat            operations while also motivating the activation of targeted
       actors construct and leverage different layers of                 responses, reinforcing democratic resilience in the face of
       digital infrastructure to execute FIMI operations.                evolving information warfare.




   1.  FIMI TRENDS AND FINDINGS IN 2024

    505          90            38.000
    incidents    countries     unique channels
                 targeted

    68.000          25            322
    observables     unique        organisations
                    platforms     targeted

    Figure 1: Key figures of findings across 2024 incidents

In 2024, the EEAS continued monitoring and investigating
FIMI threats, with a particular focus on understanding
the behaviours and targets of foreign actors, specifically
Russia and China. Based on the EEAS methodology for
analysing FIMI threats¹², this section offers an overview
of the key trends and strategic objectives behind FIMI
activities over the past year.

The EEAS detected and analysed 505 FIMI incidentsⁱ
between 4 November 2023 and 4 November 2024. Within
this sample, 38,000 unique channels were involved
across 25 different platforms and a total of over 68,000
observables (pieces of content) were recordedⁱⁱ.

Foreign threat actors employ FIMI as part of a broader
hybrid arsenal. While the sample is limited in scope, the
data indicates that threat actors’ objectives and strategies
are shaped mostly by geopolitical and economic factors.
Understanding these patterns is crucial for identifying
vulnerabilities and strengthening the integrity of the
information environment.

Mapping FIMI: Global threat
with local implications

Based on the sample, the targeting of 90 countries
underscores the global scale of FIMI operations. The
geographical and linguistic reach of FIMI operations is truly
global, with campaigns demonstrating remarkable linguistic
versatility, adapting their content to reach diverse audiences.
FIMI threat actors have targeted numerous countries and
regions across the world, with varying intensity and focus.

■  Ukraine remains the main target of Russian FIMI
   attacks, with almost half of the recorded incidents –
   257 – in the sample. The Russian FIMI infrastructure
   continues to tailor its efforts towards different target
   audiences. First, Ukrainians, to weaken the country's
   resistance to Russia’s full-scale invasion. Second,
   Western allies, including the US, NATO, G7 and
   EU countrieswith a particular focus on Germany
   and Poland, to weaken the support to Ukraine. The
   overarching goal is to shape global perceptions of the
   war in favour of Russia’s deceptive narrative.

■  After Ukraine, France was also one of the primary targets
   of hostile actors, with 152 cases detected by the EEAS that
   originated from the Russian and Chinese FIMI ecosystem.
   The Paris Olympic and Paralympic Games and the French
   legislative elections were among the main targets.

■  Germany and, in particular its coalition government,
   has been targeted consistently. In the 73 cases
   detected, such attacks happened around political events,
   international visits and the farmers’ protests, which
   garnered a lot of media attention.

    i      All the incidents have been encoded in Structured Threat Information Expression (STIX), a standardised language to express and share threat
           intelligence information in a readable and consistent format.
    ii     The empirical data in this report is derived from the EEAS’s strategic FIMI monitoring efforts. As the EEAS does not cover all regions or languages,
           this report reflects only a limited portion of threat actors’ activities. The scope of FIMI operations could extend far beyond what is represented here.




■       Outside the EU, Moldova was heavily targeted in 2024,
        with 45 incidents. Beyond the Presidential Elections and the
        EU accession referendum, the country and its President
        Maia Sandu were the object of repeated attacks by Russia
        in relation to the tensions in Transnistria, and there were
        unfounded accusations of meddling in the war in Ukraine.

■       Africa also appears to be one of the key geographical
        areas for Russian FIMI in 2024. Members of the Alliance
        of Sahel States (Mali, Niger and Burkina Faso) have been
        frequent targets. This is due to two main reasons. On the
        one hand, the region’s security and political instability make
        it easier to spread manipulated information. On the other,
        Russia has backed post-coup governments and used FIMI
        to legitimise its growing economic and military influence.

In particular, Russian FIMI campaigns are characterised
by a high level of adaptability. Approaches are tailored to
specific regional contexts while maintaining overarching
strategic goals. The EU is a major target, with eastern
parts of Europe facing Russian attacks in both national
languages and Russian, especially in areas with Russianspeaking communities. Germany and France are regularly
targeted with localised campaigns. Ukraine, Moldova, Poland
and the Baltic States remain key focus areas due to their
geopolitical importance. Beyond Europe, Russian FIMI has
also grown in the Middle East, Africa, the US, and parts of
Latin America, often taking advantage of elections, conflicts,
and crises to expand its influence.

Targets of FIMI: Threat to the stability of
institutions and organisations

In the analysed incidents, organisations were targeted in 85%
of the incidents, amounting to 322 different organisations.
These include international entities like the EU and NATO,
and the armed forces of certain Western countries, including
Germany, France and the United States. Independent media
outlets such as Le Parisien, the BBC, France 24, Der Spiegel
and La Stampa, as well as FIMI defenders like Bellingcat,
EU DisinfoLab and Correctiv have also been targeted.

Just above half (53%) of the analysed incidents targeted
individuals, including numerous EU heads of state and
government officials. These figures are often attacked
in relation to their countries or through personal
smear campaigns. High-profile EU leaders such as
Ursula von der Leyen, Kaja Kallas, Josep Borrell and Charles
Michel have all been targeted by FIMI campaigns. These
operations often pursue contradictory narratives, portraying
the EU as both weak and ineffective while simultaneously
accusing it of interfering in the internal affairs of third countries.

Democratic institutions and processes, especially
elections, have been major FIMI targets over the past
year. These operations start well before polling day and
continue afterwards. Among the electoral events with most
incidents recorded are the 2024 European Elections, the
Taiwan Presidential elections, the US Presidential elections,
the Moldovan Presidential elections and EU accession
referendum, the Georgian Parliamentary elections, and the
French legislative electionsⁱⁱⁱ.

For the European Elections, the EEAS detected 42 cases of
Russian FIMI activity, which escalated in the weeks leading
up to the vote, peaking between 6–9 June, and continuing
well beyond that. The operation followed a familiar pattern:
setting up the FIMI infrastructure well in advance, attacks on
the democratic process, cyber-enabled interference, a surge
in activity just before the vote, and post-election efforts to
undermine trust in the results. This evolution closely aligned
with the perspective of the 2nd EEAS Report on FIMI Threats
(2023)¹³, highlighting the ongoing need for preparedness
and countermeasures to protect electoral integrity. Although
no severe incidents were detected by the EEAS, electionrelated FIMI remains a persistent threat that must be
continuously monitored, analysed and countered. With
more elections scheduled for 2025, anticipatory analysis
and proactive measures remain essential.

Cross-platform activities: Exploiting
algorithms and specific features

FIMI, as part of a hybrid dimension, is linked to activities
occurring in both the offline and the cyber domains. However,
when it comes to its digital presence, social media platforms
remain the most cost-effective tool for threat actors to conduct
their operations and reach worldwide audiences. In our sample
of over 38,000 channelsⁱᵛ, Xformerly Twitterattracts 88%
of the activity detected in the FIMI cases. This is explained
by the presence of Coordinated and Inauthentic Behaviour
(CIB – see Glossary) accounts detected on the platform, but
also by the possibility of quickly creating disposable accounts.

Websites containing misleading content are widely used
in FIMI operations, too, particularly for impersonation,

    iii     The data collection covered incidents up until early November 2024. FIMI activities related to the Romanian elections are not included in the sample.
    iv      The analysis of platforms used in FIMI incidents relies on the accessibility of data and feasibility of automated collection.




    as seen in campaigns like Doppelgänger and False Façade,                campaigns. For instance, the EEAS identified inauthentic
    which will be examined later in the report. These tactics               accounts running Facebook ads to weaken Western
    often target widely recognised media outlets or involve the             support for Ukraine.
    creation of inauthentic news sites to spread FIMI.
                                                                         ■  A classic technique is the acquisition of bot networks and
    Threat actors also exploit the possibility of using platforms for       CIBs, which are deployed to artificially boost the visibility
    advertising, sometimes bypassing the platforms’ restrictions            of specific content. These types of disposable accounts
    on political ads.                                                       dominate FIMI operations, accounting for 3 out of 4
                                                                            (73%) recorded channels (28,000 out of 38,000). These
    The vast majority of the incidents do not occur on a single             networks, often short-lived and disposable—active only for
    platform but tend to be active on multiple fronts, with content         a single campaign or swiftly removed by platforms—pose
    often cross-posted by different accounts on various platforms.          some challenges. Their transient nature makes identifying
    The choice of platform depends on the target audience’s                 their origins difficult, yet they remain a core component
    preferred channels. For example, many incidents targeting               of FIMI infrastructure, effectively amplifying the content’s
    African countries are predominantly found on Facebook.                  visibility while evading sustained detection. The true reach
                                                                            and impact of these networks remains unclear.

                                                                         ■  Impersonation is a common technique used to target
                                                                            entities and individuals. Whether through the creation
                                                                            of inauthentic news sites resembling local or legitimate
                                                                            media outlets (124 incidents recorded) or the outright
                                                                            impersonation of established entities, like news outlets or
       Facebook          X / Twitter                                        organisations (127 occurrences), threat actors exploit the
        15.000           33.000                                             legitimacy of the impersonated entity, while at the same time
       Youtube                                                              undermining the audience’s trust in official sources once
          94                                                                the deception is uncovered. FIMI actors understand that

                                                                            independent media are central in democratic societies, for
       Websites                                    TikTok                   the free flow of information, and therefore try to exploit their
        14.000      VK                             160                      important role by usurping their identity or pretending to be

       Telegram    183                                                      legitimate outlets. The EEAS also investigated 13 cases of
         759                                                                impersonation of political personalities or celebrities, which
                                                                            aimed either to distribute content smearing the targeted
                                                                            individual or to use their popularity as a leverage for the
    Figure 2: Distribution of channels involved in FIMI incidents per       amplification of the manipulative content.
    platform (Top 7)


FIMI Tactics, Techniques and Procedures
(TTPs): Diverse and evolving

Most of the FIMI cases analysed used simple TTPs, like
posting texts, images or videos. However, some cases
involved more complex combinations of TTPs.

■  FIMI is often adapted to local audiences: At least 349
   incidents used content localisation techniques, tailoring
   messages to the target area’s consumption habits. This
   includes shaping narratives with local references—such
   as culture, events and language—to enhance credibility
   and impact. In 28 incidents, online ads were used to reach
   specific audiences and penetrate broader information
   bubbles. This strategy enhances the impact of FIMI
■  Finally, Artificial Intelligence (AI) remains an important
   technology for the evolution of FIMI¹⁴. The use of AI in
   FIMI incidents has become more frequent and the advances
   in generative AI have been gradually reflected in FIMI
   incidents. Its use makes it easier for threat actors to carry out
   or automate certain activities, for example content creation,
   as well as making them more cost-effective. However,
   this does not necessarily translate into a greater impact
   of these activities. The EEAS recorded around 41 cases
   last year where AI was used to manipulate information.
   The two main applications were the creation of inauthentic
   content—such as deepfake audios and videos—and the
   large-scale automated dissemination through bot networks.
   AI-generated text is also probably used in FIMI operations,
   but its detection remains challenging, making it difficult to
   confirm its presence with certainty.




    RUSSIA AS A FIMI THREAT ACTOR IN 2024

    Russia’s approach to the weaponisation of information                 pressure is backed by covert influence operations through
    to advance its geopolitical objectives is complex, long-              obfuscated money transfers, paid influencers and social
    term, and employs both state and non-state structures. The            media flooding. Similarly, the parliamentary elections and
    concept of “information confrontation” (Информационное                the ensuing civic unrest in Georgia were also on Russia’s
    противоборство) is central to Russian doctrine, where                 radar, with pro-Kremlin FIMI actors seeking to erode
    information is both the weapon and the environment.                   societal cohesion and exacerbate the political divide. These
                                                                          manipulative attempts confirm that democratic elections
    Overall, Russia’s role as a FIMI actor reflects how it                are among the prime targets for Russian FIMI operations.
    perceives the information space as a warfighting domain.
    Using a combination of state and non-state actors, Russia             Censorship also plays a critical role in this strategy.
    has developed a multi-layered strategy and has sought to              Independent media in Russia have been silenced, while
    shape global narratives to advance Moscow’s geopolitical              state-controlled outlets receive substantial funding and
    objectives. By focussing on exerting long-term influence              backing. Reportedly in 2025, the Russian government is
    rather than isolated incidents, Russia continues to exploit           planning to allocate at least 137.2 billion roubles (approx.
    weaknesses in the global information landscape, making its            1.18 billion EUR) to state outlets and platforms¹⁶. This implies
    FIMI tactics a serious security concern for the European Union.       that state control over the information sphere is a crucial part
                                                                          of Russia’s war effort, highlighting the connection between
    Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022           media control and that war effort.
    highlighted the broad spectrum of information manipulation
    tactics used by the Kremlin, including building on disinformation     This state-controlled ecosystem is exemplified by large-scale
    narratives seeded as far back as 2013-2014 and earlier. Since         influence operations like RT (Russia Today), created in 2005,
    then, Russia’s manipulative efforts can be characterised              operating globally under the guise of legitimate media outlets. In
    as attempts to build a False Façade to hide pro-Kremlin               2024, RT expanded its network to new geographical areas, for
    information laundering operations or to impersonate                   instance launching RT Balkans out of Serbia, Significant efforts
    legitimate media outlets in order to co-opt their credibility.        go into undermining the EU’s policies in the Western Balkans
                                                                          by misrepresenting the EU enlargement process. Another
    In 2024, Russia particularly deployed these manipulative              recent example includes Sputnik, a further tool for Russia’s
    tactics in the context of the European elections, where               global information manipulation. Sputnik opened an office in
    pro-Kremlin outlets tried to target voters across EU Member           Indonesia in 2024 and expanded its amplifier network there.
    States with narratives undermining support for Ukraine. Other
    significant elements include campaigns to smear prominent             Russia has also integrated its diplomatic action with its
    European political leaders with claims of corruption and              FIMI campaigns. Russian state officials used various
    attempts to stoke protests, encourage abstentions from                international diplomatic fora to lend legitimacy to Russian
    voting and foment distrust in the European institutions.              disinformation and information manipulation, while the
    However, the EU and its Member States duly noticed these              diplomatic accounts on social media serve as amplifiers to
    manipulative attempts and countered false claims through              increase the reach in regions across Africa, the Middle East and
    exposure and awareness-raising campaigns. EUvsDisinfo                 Latin America. They also attempt to legitimise disinformation
    has actively published analyses exposing FIMI operations              through fake fact-checking initiatives, such as by launching
    aimed at influencing elections¹⁵.                                     the alleged “Global Fact-Checking Network” in 2024.

Moreover, Russia's FIMI campaigns have also sought
to exploit specific local vulnerabilities in the political,
social and technological spheres with carefully tailored
and targeted content, particularly where Russia seeks to
advance its foreign and security policy interests. In 2024,
Russia also sought to interfere in democratic processes in
Moldova, targeting both its Presidential elections and the
referendum on EU accession. The Kremlin’s attempted
interference in Moldova demonstrates how overt political
Apart from the behavioural patterns, Russia’s strategy
for influencing specific audiences relies also on crafting
narratives tailored to resonate with their sentiments. This
approach includes undermining support for Ukraine and
sanctions against Russia, stirring nationalist and anti-immigrant sentiments, and exaggerating economic disparities
alongside political divisions. Additionally, it fuels cultural
tensions over issues like LGBTQ+ rights and minority rights,
and it questions the competency of Western defence systems.




    CHINA AS A FIMI THREAT ACTOR IN 2024

For years, China has employed multiple FIMI TTPs to
advance its interests worldwide, from classic information
operations to suppressing critical voices. In 2024, the
Taiwanese and, to a lesser extent, the US Presidential
elections were targeted by Chinese FIMI operations¹⁷. The
EEAS also observed that the evolving situation in the South
China Sea continued to serve as another high-profile front
for sustained FIMI activities.

China continues expanding its state-controlled media
footprint in the global information environment, including
through an increasing number of social media channels,
used to proliferate both general and (most notably in Africa¹⁸)
localised content, carefully curated in line with China’s
official narratives. The September 2024 Forum on Africa-
China Cooperation served as a useful exercise for fostering
stronger media links across the continent¹⁹.

However, the network of China’s FIMI assets and proxies
extends well beyond the state media enterprise. The analysis
confirms an increase in soliciting both private PR companies
and influencers to create, amplify and launder content aligned
with China’s political interests worldwide. Covert online FIMI
networks, such as the Paperwall²⁰ campaign, present an ongoing
challenge as they spread state-aligned messages to unwitting
audiences. This contributes to a broader geographical
and linguistic coverage for disseminating content with
concealed origins and affiliation, e.g. by removing partnership
banners, or using layered intermediary structures.

Content is often created in cooperation with foreign
entities (e.g. media co-production, influencer partnerships)
to increase the perception of credibility and further hide
connections to the state-linked structures. Another vector
of global engagement and content production on the rise
over the last two years is the sub-national level International
Communication Centres²¹.

Information suppression continues to be one of the
most concerning elements of Chinese FIMI, and an oftenoverlooked element of transnational repression²². It can target
larger entities such as businesses, civil society, universities
and even government, but also – and very often – (diaspora)
individuals and their families. Measures vary from economic
incentives and deterrents, restrictions on visas and editorial
policies, online or physical intimidation and harassment, to
legal warfare, and even detentions. Due to their sensitive
and covert nature, these activities often fly under the radar.

Information suppression is just one example of how FIMI
works hand in hand with the broader hybrid threats in the
cyber, legal and economic domains. The links between
the latter and FIMI have been particularly visible in Africa²³
where expansion of the media infrastructure and journalist
training efforts help increase Chinese investment’s visibility,
and the economic benefits or potential for coercion can be
leveraged to shape the local information environment.

When it comes to narratives, our analysis shows that China’s
strong efforts to defend its international image continue
in 2024, especially regarding human rights, the South China
Sea, and areas it deems exclusively domestic, such as
Xinjiang, Tibet, Hong Kong and Taiwan. At the same time,
Chinese actors regularly leverage international conflicts
(e.g. Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, Gaza)
as vectors for projecting China’s positive role in the global
arena, often pairing it with offensive narratives targeting “the
West” as hypocritical and inefficient vis-à-vis the Chinese
model of international engagement.

China’s FIMI activities operate alongside other threat
actors, including Russia. While there have been several
reports about the extent of convergence and mutual
learning between the Russian and Chinese ecosystems,
the cross-pollination between the two seems to remain
largely opportunistic. In the month that marked 1000 days
since Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine, a significant
alignment in Sino-Russian narratives emerged, with hostile
messaging blaming NATO for the conflict escalation.

Over the coming years, we expect China will continue
expanding its reach and set of FIMI TTPs, leveraging vectors
at both state and sub-national level, enhancing the publicprivate partnerships, experimenting more with emerging
technology, and exporting more domestic practices to help
suppress unfavourable information.




   2.  FIMI EXPOSURE MATRIX: A SYSTEMATIC APPROACH TO
       CLASSIFYING AND ATTRIBUTING FIMI INFRASTRUCTURE

    FIMI operations unfold within a complex galaxy of                   the FIMI architecture. This unified language supports a
    interconnected digital networks, where each channel plays           coordinated European and global response to FIMI threats.
    a role in generating, distributing, amplifying or integrating
    FIMI content into the broader public sphere.                        The key elements of the FIMI Exposure Matrix are:

The degree of control a threat actor has over its FIMI
architecture varies in complexity, with different levels
of involvement. At the core of the FIMI infrastructure lies
a central network of channels openly controlled by a threat
actor. This backbone of attributed channels not only operates
independently but also connects and influences other nodes
in the FIMI architecture.

In addition to the overt control of media assets, threat actors
also covertly create and operate other networks. These
hidden infrastructures are frequently camouflaged
using various techniques to obscure their origins,
while increasing the efficiency of FIMI activities. In
many cases, threat actors also leverage proxies or take
advantage of existing infrastructures, whether “friendly” or
merely opportunistic, to amplify their content and reach to
specific ideological audiences.

Threat actors exploit anonymity, making it difficult to trace
operations and shielding them from facing exposure or legal
accountability. This anonymity presents a significant
challenge when applying the FIMI Toolbox of responses²⁴
against perpetrators —such as enforcing transparency
rules for advertising, assigning political attribution, taking
diplomatic actions or imposing sanctions²⁵ and restrictive
measures. Many of these responses demand concrete
evidence to identify who is behind an operation.

Given the global nature of the FIMI threat, developing effective
responses requires a unified and collective approach. A
common system for categorisingand potentially attributing
sources– to a threat actor is crucial for harmonising
analysis and coordinating joint counteractions.

Building on the A or the Actor in the ABCDE Framework²⁶,
the EEAS proposes a common model that categorises
sources based on their level of connection to a threat
actor. This will enable more accurate attribution and broaden
the scope to include channels that are otherwise difficult
to define. The classification of channels within the proposed
categories is not static, as they may be reclassified if new
evidence emerges. Additionally, the Matrix establishes
a common terminology to describe various layers within

■  Mapping channels of the attributed infrastructure
   and beyond: As highlighted, the FIMI infrastructure is
   composed of multiple layers of networks, each fulfilling
   distinct roles in the promotion of FIMI activities. Many
   influential channels, which do not belong nor can be
   attributed to any threat actor’s infrastructure, due to
   insufficient evidence, recurrently interact with it and play
   a pivotal role in generating and amplifying FIMI content.
   To address this complexity, a robust categorisation system
   must go beyond attribution, defining and integrating these
   additional layers of networks to measure effectively their
   degree of connection to threat actors.
■  Prioritising behavioural and technical indicators:
   Assessing the connections to threat actors requires
   a meticulous evaluation, relying on a combination
   of behavioural and technical indicators²⁷—narrative
   alignment alone is insufficient. Only because a narrative
   benefits a threat actor, this does not imply that all
   channels amplifying it are directly part of the threat
   actor’s media ecosystem. It is important to avoid the
   over-attribution of FIMI campaigns. Building on the
   behaviour-first approach outlined in the 1ˢᵗ FIMI report²⁸
   and drawing parallels with cyber threat attribution
   methods²⁹, this system defines a set of standardised
   indicators to categorise channels based on their role and
   degrees of connection to a threat actor. By cataloguing
   the repetitive use of specific Attack Patterns—classified
   under Tactics, Techniques and Procedures (TTPs) and
   other elements encoded in STIX³⁰ objects—it becomes
   possible to attribute operations with greater precision.
■  Combining data sources to categorise networks and
   operations: FIMI activities leave behind digital footprints
   that, when pieced together, can connect perpetrators to
   specific operations. These often function within a hybrid
   and offline dimension, requiring the collection, analysis,
   and evaluation of diverse pieces of evidence. However,
   access to data varies across organisations, affecting
   the depth and accuracy of analysis³¹. When feasible,
   combining information from different types of sources
   helps create a more complete and reliable assessment.
■  Enhancing monitoring and response capabilities:
   Beyond attribution and naming, the Exposure Matrix
   strengthens monitoring efforts by providing a structured



 approach to identify emerging channels within the FIMI
 architecture. A clear classification system and predefined
 indicators help analysts quickly identify new infrastructure
 components, improve data collection, and enhance
 analytical methods, ultimately boosting detection and
 response efforts.

THE FOUR BLOCKS OF THE FIMI
ARCHITECTURE

Building on past research and insights from the research
community³², the FIMI Exposure Matrix establishes
systematic criteria for classifying channels based on
the level of connection to a threat actor. Actor-agnostic
by design, the model applies to all forms of digital media,
including websites, social media accounts, and other online
communication channels, capturing the full spectrum of
digital presence used within the FIMI architecture.

The Exposure Matrix is composed of four categories: three
are attributed to a threat actor, while the fourth includes
non-attributed sources that still play a significant role in
FIMI activities. Within the attributed group, two categories
have transparent ties to the threat actor, while the third,
along with the non-attributed category, maintain hidden
connections or less apparent forms of coordination.

    Four blocks of the FIMI Architecture

    OFFICIAL STATE CHANNELS

    Official communication channels directly    STATE-CONTROLLED OUTLETS
    operated by a government and its            Media outlets funded, managed, and
    representatives, openly reflecting the      editorially controlled by state-appointed
    state's official voice.                     bodies or the ruling party. These outlets
    ▪ Examples: Government accounts,            deliver the editorial line set by the state.
      MFA representatives.                      • Examples: RT, Sputnik, CGTN,
                                                  and their official mirror sites.

       OVERT

       COVERT

    STATE-LINKED CHANNELS                              ATTRIBUTED

    Channels that operate under state                  NON ATTRIBUTED
    oversight without publicly disclosing
    their affiliation. Uncovering their
    connection to the state requires a
    combination of evidence to reveal hidden
    patterns of influence or indirect control.
    •  Examples: Channels run by intelligence          STATE-ALIGNED CHANNELS
       services, controlled by individuals with
       strong ties to the government or ruling         Channels that cannot be directly
       party, or media outlets editorially directed    attributed to state control or funding and
       or overseen by state actors.                    therefore remain unattributed but show
                                                       systematic signs of alignment with a state
                                                       entity. They fall into this category until
                                                       more evidence emerges to confirm
                                                       attribution to state infrastructure.
                                                       • Examples: Portal Kombat,
                                                         False Façade, Paperwall.

    Figure 3: FIMI Iceberg - The four blocks that compose the FIMI Architecture




    BUILDING THE EVIDENCE:                                         media environment are assigned to categories based on data
    KEY INDICATORS TO TRACK                                        collected through investigations. However, their classification
                                                                   is not static—as new evidence emerges, a channel may
    Each category is defined by a predetermined set of             shift to a different category, ensuring a more accurate
    behavioural and technical indicators. Channels in the FIMI     understanding of its connection to a threat actor.

    Entities in the FIMI Architecture

    OFFICIAL                                                                                                                                 J
    STATE

                          Ministry of     Foreign Intelligence     Russian         Russian     China     Chinese                             Chinese            Chinese
                Foreign Aﬀairs of         Service of the Russian     Embassies    Missions     State Council     Foreign Ministry            Ministry of     Embassies
                the Russian Federation    Federation                                           Information Oﬃce    Spokesperson              State Security

                STATE-                                         RG                                                  A                         CR
                CONTROLLED
                OUTLETS

                                          RT    Moscow24  Rossiyskaya             Channel One Russia  Zvezda TV  Vladimir     Xhinhua News   China Radio        CGTN
                                                             Gazeta                                              Solovyov     Agency         International

                                                                                                                                   GT         Li                CHINA
                                          Ukraina.ru               RIA Novosti    Ruptly TV           Sputnik                                People’s Daily     DAILY

                                                                                                                 Margarita    Global Times                      China Daily
                                                        MHOCMM                                                   Simonyan                    \
                                                                     inosmi                    The Red Stream
                                                                                  TASS                                                       Ts.cn

    STATE-LINKED                          observateur                              M                 sine
    CHANNELS             2023             NEO  cortinental                        mash

                       African            New Eastern   Observateur     Ren TV    MASH       Riafan
                      Initiative          Outlook       Continental                                  Sina

    GlobalResearch                                      Life.ru         Argumenty I Fakty    Lenta    X

    Global Research

                      African Stream                                    RYBAR                     guancha.cn

                                                        Izvestia        Rybar LLC            Tsargrad TV

    RRN/
Doppelgänger      Foundation to
                  Battle Injustice

RU
                HHKTWLHCHOATY
                NEWS FRONT                      Phoenix TV
                c0egct-0s) (6CHT
Readovka        NewsFront            Gazeta.ru
                                                CN

    STATE-
    ALIGNED
            False       Portal Kombat     Matryoshka    HaiEnergy    Paperwall    Dragonbridge                                                 VN Network
            Facade    (News-Pravda.com)    operation

    Figure 4: Classification of Russian and Chinese entities involved in FIMI activities according to the four blocks of the FIMI Architectureᵛ

    v  This is not an exhaustive list of entities but for indicative purposes only, illustrating relevant examples.




    Determining a channel’s funding, editorial control, or governance           activities. These include digital signatures, hosting
    is relatively easier when its ties to a threat actor are transparent.       patterns and other technical traces that help identify
    However, when these connections are obscured, gathering                     the underlying infrastructure of an operation.
    reliable indicators becomes more complex. To address this,
    a combination of technical and behavioural indicators is                 ■  Behavioural indicators – Activity patterns and
    used to fill gaps and support the categorisation, eventually                coordinated behaviours across channels involved in
    leading to the attribution of operations.                                   FIMI operations. They highlight the recurrent use of
                                                                                specific TTPs, as well as systematic attack patterns
    ■  Technical indicators – Information related to the digital                in content creation, distribution and engagement
       infrastructure and operational systems behind FIMI                       strategies.

    OPEN       PROPRIETARY     CLASSIFIED
    SOURCE     SOURCE          SOURCE

       TECHNICAL EVIDENCE                                    BEHAVIOURAL EVIDENCE

    Public affiliation                                    Systematic interaction and amplification patterns
    •  Direct statements or self-attribution              □  Persistent backlinking, automated republishing,
                                                             mirroring content and information laundering using

    Financial records                                        copy-pasting or automated translations
                                                          □  Reiterated engagement using cross references,
    •  Documentation of financial or operational links       reshares, likes and comments

Shared infrastructure
□  Backend data
□  IP addresses
□  Hosting services
□  Domain ownership
□  Metadata analysis of files
□  Geolocation
□  Ad networks
□  Cryptocurrency wallets and unique identifiers
   for commercial services
□  Matching patterns in accounts creation dates
   and names
□  Use of same code/templates
□  Autonomous System Numbers
□  Social Credit Numbers
□  Indexed or archived internet content
Reiterated use of inauthentic media assets
□  Patterns of impersonation or inauthentic accounts,
   such as AI-generated accounts


Coordinated messaging
□  Linguistic patterns such as similar phrasing
   or terminology
□  Synchronised publication time and alignment
   with specific time zones
□  Agenda-setting and aligned cross-posting across
   multiple platforms at similar timestamps
□  Systematic use of AI tools to generate content
□  Recurrent use of certain hashtags
□  Branding and visual similarities


                                                             Historical consistency and interaction with
                                                             other operations
                                                             □  Repeated playbooks. Activity aligned with known
                                                                patterns from other campaigns

    Table 1: Types of access to data and types of evidence (from higher to medium confidence level indicators)ᵛⁱ

    vi  The list of proposed indicators is comprehensive but not exhaustive, and may be expanded to include additional relevant elements as needed.




Not all indicators carry the same weight in connecting
operations and leading to attribution. High-confidence
indicators, such as financial records, shared technical
infrastructure or direct affiliations, provide concrete,
verifiable connections to a threat actor. In contrast,
medium-confidence signals, like content alignment or
posting patterns, can suggest coordination but lack
definitive proof of attribution. These indicators need to
be combined in order to make a strong assessment.
Technical indicators tend to be stronger when ownership
is traceable, while behavioural patterns require careful
interpretation and persistent occurrences. The most
reliable assessments rely on a combination of signals,
prioritising those with clear, evidence-based attribution
over those that are more circumstantial.

In order to gather evidence, access to data can vary
depending on the organisation conducting the research³³.
Open source data³⁴ provide valuable behavioural insights
but often lack the technical precision necessary for
conclusive attribution. Proprietary data offer deeper
technical and behavioural information but are frequently

limited by commercial interests, corporate policies or legal
restrictions on the basis of data protection. Classified
data, while delivering the most comprehensive insights,
are subject to strict access controls. While combining
data from these sources is challenging, integrating them
in specific cases allows for more robust categorisation
and attribution.

DECODING THE CRITERIA FOR
CATEGORISING AND ATTRIBUTING


Using combinations of the above-mentioned indicators,
we can classify sources according to the four categories
of the model.
disinformation but tactical assets in broader influence
operations, designed to shape narratives, manipulate
perceptions, and destabilise adversaries. Their role shows
why FIMI is a hybrid threat—it combines hidden tactics

 CRITERIA: INDICATORS PER CATEGORY

  State official channels
   Channels attributed to a state based on technical
   evidence of funding, ownership and editorial
   control based on Open Source indicators.
   •     Self-attributed channels to the Government

  State-controlled outlets

   Channels attributed to a state based on technical
   evidence of funding, ownership and editorial
   control based on Open Source indicators.
   •     Self-attributed channels to state media
   •     Alternative domains used by state-controlled
 OVERT media sharing infrastructure with the original
         channel (such as IP addresses, hosting services,
         or domain ownership)

  State-linked channels
 COVERT
   Channels attributed to a Threat Actor based on
   access to high-confidence indicators (mostly from
   proprietary or classified sources) and combined
   with medium-level Open Source indicators.
   •     Financial records providing state funding
   •     Shared infrastructure detected through proprietary and
   •     classified information
         Combination of technical and behavioural indicators       ATTRIBUTED
         linking new channels to previously attributed state-linked
         infrastructure (e.g., shared infrastructure, systematic
         interaction and amplification, coordinated messaging
         and historical consistency with attributed operations)

    The key distinction between State Official channels (Category            State aligned channels                                           NON-ATTRIBUTED
    1) and State-controlled outlets (Category 2) lies in their role           Channels aligned with Threat Actors’ activity
    within state communication. The first category consists of official       according to a combination of medium-level
    government communication channels, such as spokesperson                   indicators (mostly based on Open Source
    services and ministries’ public messaging platforms. In contrast,         information).
    the second category includes state-controlled outlets—they are            •     Combination of technical and behavioural indicators
    owned, funded and editorially controlled by the government                      showing strong, repetitive patterns of alignment with
    but operate under the guise of media organisations rather than                  FIMI-attributed infrastructure:
    as direct extensions of state messaging.                                        -     Shared infrastructure
                                                                                    -     Systematic interaction and amplification
    The most complex categories to define are State-linked                          -     Reiterated use of inauthentic media assets
    (Category 3) and State-aligned (Category 4) channels, as                        -     Coordinated messaging
                                                                                    -     Historical consistency and interaction with other
    both are deeply embedded in the hybrid threat dimension.                              operations
    These channels are not merely disseminators of




with public messaging, taking advantage of the blurred lines
between government actions, media influence, and online
manipulation to push political and strategic goals. These
channels operate in a grey zone, obscuring their true origin
while remaining central to influence campaigns.
attack patterns, much like in cybersecurity with Advanced
Persistent Threats (APTs). In the future, it may be possible to
attribute operations based on recurring attack patterns
and combinations of STIX objects previously attributed
to specific threat actors.

    The difference between State-controlled (Category 2) and          FROM CLASSIFICATION TO
    State-linked (Category 3) channels lies in how openly they        STRATEGIC RESPONSES
    operate. Both receive government funding and direction,
    directly or indirectly, but State-linked channels work in         The FIMI Exposure Matrix provides a structured methodology
    the shadows. They are often uncovered through proprietary         for classifying channels, ensuring a more precise and
    or classified intelligence, such as financial transactions or     scalable approach to countering FIMI operations. It
    backend infrastructure records. In some cases, attribution        serves as a valuable tool for policymakers, NGOs, and
    is also possible with a combination of strong open source         researchers, helping them refine their work, while also
    evidence that reveal that these channels belong to the same       informing the public about how FIMI operations work.
    infrastructure used by the threat actor.
                                                                      By mapping attack patterns and the creation of new
    State-linked (Category 3) channels are formally attributed        infrastructures more precisely, the Matrix supports
    to a threat actor, while State-aligned (Category 4) channels      anticipatory analysis, improving preparedness to face
    are not currently attributed but could be if new evidence         FIMI operations.
    emerges. This is either because the available evidence
    does not meet the threshold for technical attribution or          Furthermore, by distinguishing between different levels
    because these channels operate independently while                of attribution and alignment, this model enables a more
    consistently aligning with FIMI activity. However, their          targeted activation of the FIMI Toolbox, ensuring that
    involvement is neither coincidental nor accidental.               responses align with each channel’s specific role and
    Despite the lack of direct attribution, their systematic role     function. This is crucial for policymakers to make informed
    in FIMI operations justifies their classification, as they        decisions and establish proactive systems beyond reactive
    remain deeply embedded in the FIMI galaxy and serve as            measures. These responses include legal actions, platform
    key enablers in influence campaigns.                              enforcement, strategic communication efforts, and other
                                                                      measures within the FIMI Toolbox designed to expose,
    While technical and behavioural evidence strengthens              disrupt, and deter FIMI activities.
    public attribution, the final decision is often political³⁵.
                                                                      In the following section, we will apply this model in practice,
    As the understanding of FIMI operations grows, accumulating       unveiling these categories through the results of data
    evidence and attributing campaigns can help analysts map          gathered in investigations carried out in 2024.




   3.  EXPOSING THE ARCHITECTURE OF FIMI OPERATIONS:
       A NETWORK ANALYSIS OF INFLUENCE OPERATIONS

Between November 2023 and November 2024, the EEAS
documented 505 FIMI incidents. In this sample, 38,000
unique channels were mobilised, each playing a role
in seeding or amplifying influence operations. This vast
infrastructure, based on a limited collection of cases,
spanning multiple platforms and regions, highlights
the scale and complexity of FIMI activities at a
global scale.

Based on this compilation of evidence, this chapter presents
a network visualisation that maps the different blocks
in the FIMI infrastructure (available in pages 22 and 23).
By applying the FIMI Exposure Matrix to the sample of
channels, this analysis reveals how the infrastructure
of different threat actors operates, how attributed and
non-attributed channels interact, and how different
threat actors at times coordinate influence efforts.
Moreover, the network graph highlights the key nodes
driving FIMI operations—high-impact channels that
trigger broader activation across the ecosystem, or serve
as critical coordination hubs. Identifying these hot spots
in the FIMI architecture provides valuable early indicators
for researchers, enabling more focused monitoring of the
behavioural patterns in key segments of the infrastructure.

To ensure the graph remains clear and readable, a core
set of 2,055 channels is represented—only those that
appeared in multiple incidents and are connected to at
least two other nodes. This filtering removed 28,000
disposable assets linked to Coordinated Inauthentic
Behaviour (CIB) networks, ensuring the graph highlights
the most relevant and recurrent channels in the FIMI
infrastructure.

In the graph, each channel is represented as a node, and
connections indicate shared involvement in FIMI incidents.
In total, 2,055 channels generated 8,056 connections.
Stronger links reflect more frequent interactions. Nodes
are positioned closer together when they frequently
collaborate or amplify similar content. Additionally, larger
nodes represent higher participation in FIMI incidents and
greater connectivity with other channels, identifying key
players within the FIMI infrastructure.

Who is who in the FIMI architecture

The network analysis highlights the dominant presence
of two main threat actors: Russia and China. Nodes are
colour-coded based on attribution—red nodes represent
Russian-attributed channels, while blue nodes indicate
Chinese-attributed channels. Together, the Russianattributed infrastructure (composed by State Official, State-
Controlled, and State-Linked channels) represents a fifth
(20%) of the total FIMI architecture, while Chinese-attributed
infrastructure occupies 3.5%.

Nodes not officially attributed to Russia or China are
shown in grey. As previously explained, the attributed
infrastructures rely on extensive networks of state-aligned
channels, which systematically contribute to FIMI operations.
This segment forms the largest part of the graph,
accounting for more than three-quarters (76.5%) of
the whole architecture. Identifying who is who within
the FIMI infrastructure requires collecting and analysing
technical and behavioural indicators, as outlined in the FIMI
Exposure Matrix.

China’s infrastructure is highly centralised and synchronised,
with channels activated simultaneously on the same topic
and target, ensuring a unified global voice. In contrast,
Russia’s approach is more decentralised, adapting the
infrastructure to different regions, topics and media
types. While Russia runs parallel campaigns tailored
to specific geopolitical interests, China focuses on
reinforcing its stance on topics considered sensitive
by the Chinese state apparatus or reshaping international
perspectives on Chinese domestic policies, particularly
regarding human rights.

Russian networks of influence

At the core of Russia’s FIMI infrastructure, we find a
layer of attributed channels directly tied to the Kremlin
(red nodes). Within this group, state-controlled outlets
serve as key nodes, driving Kremlin-backed content.
Outlets like Sputnik, RT, TASS, Ria Novosti, Gazeta,
Lenta, SolovievLive, and Ukraina.ru play a central role in
producing and amplifying state narratives. Alongside them,




diplomatic accounts function more selectively, primarily
reposting content from the Russian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and interacting with influential but non-attributed
channels within the broader infrastructure.

Beyond this visible layer, Russia also operates through
channels that conceal their ties to the state apparatus.
These covertly affiliated entities help expand Russia’s
reach, making its narratives appear more organic and
diverse. For example, the Doppelgänger campaign and
the cluster linked to African Initiative.

A third layer consists of state-aligned but non-attributed
channels (grey nodes) that reinforce and spread Russian
messaging without being officially recognised as part
of the Kremlin’s network. These include news sites,
blogs, influencers and YouTube channels that mirror,
repackage, or launder content from state-controlled
outlets to target different audiences. Some act as
booster nodes, with large follower bases and strong
influence within specific clusters, helping content spread
into local echo chambers. Long-running FIMI operations,
like Portal Kombat and False Façade, are also key clusters
in this space, ensuring that Russian narratives remain
active and influential, even when official sources are
restricted or banned in certain regions.

Chinese networks of influence

China’s FIMI infrastructure is built around state-controlled
outlets like Global Times and CGTN, which serve as key
nodes for producing and distributing official narratives. Each of
these outlets operates its own amplification cluster, ensuring
content reaches global audiences. Chinese diplomatic
accounts act as major booster nodes, rapidly reposting
state-backed content to maximise visibility and occasionally
amplifying Russian media when their narratives align.

Beyond its visible infrastructure, China relies on seemingly
independent news sites, podcasts, and social media
influencers to covertly extend its influence. For example,
these are managed by PR firms and service providers
with links to the state. They systematically repurpose
and repackage official messaging while maintaining an
appearance of independence. A key technique of this strategy
is diversifying content formats—transforming state narratives
into videos, cartoons and articles—to adapt messaging for
different platforms and audiences, making Chinese FIMI
efforts more versatile and harder to trace. By blurring the
lines between state-controlled and independent media,
China effectively inserts its messaging into both local and
international debate.

Key nodes

The prominence of key nodes in the network is determined
by their role at different levels:

■  High-influence hubs – These core channels generate
   and distribute large volumes of content across multiple
   clusters. Primarily state-controlled media outlets, such
   as Sputnik, RT, TASS, Gazeta, Lenta, SolovievLive,
   Ukraina.ru, CGTN and Global Times, they act as the
   main drivers of state-backed narratives.

■  Boosters – These accounts, pages and websites
   systematically repost and spread content from core
   actors, increasing the visibility and reach of state-backed
   narratives. Some clusters, like Portal Kombat or False
   Façade, automatically republish content, making them
   key nodes in their respective networks. By leveraging
   large follower bases, these amplifiers inject FIMI content
   into local information environments, increasing its
   legitimacy and impact.

■  Bridges between clusters – These nodes act as
   connectors between different clusters, ensuring that
   content spreads across platforms and geographic
   regions. By linking various clusters, they help embed state
   narratives into different digital ecosystems, expanding
   their global reach and influence. Examples include
   Sputnik Afrique, and French- and English-language
   versions of Pravda, which act as connectors between
   Russia’s core infrastructure and regional clusters in
   Africa. Additionally, Russia and China strengthen their
   connection through state-controlled media like CGTN,
   Global Times, RIA Novosti, RT and Sputnik, acting as
   bridges to cross-amplify narratives.

Content dissemination strategies

The FIMI architecture does not rely on just one platform—it
is designed to spread its influence across diverse digital
media, adjusting its techniques to fit each space. From
major social media platforms like Telegram, X, Facebook,
YouTube and TikTok to inauthentic news sites, they ensure
their narratives circulate widely. While both Russia and
China operate across multiple mainstream platforms, their



REPORT ON FIMI THREATS / March 2025    EEAS    REPORT ON FIMI THREATS / March 2025    EEAS
The galaxy of FIMI operations

      Attributed to Russia
      Attributed to China
      Non attributed
      Participation in
22                            23



preferences differ when it comes to more alternative spaces—
Russian activity is more present on VKontakte, RuTube,
Rumble and Odysee, while Chinese activity relies on Quora,
podcasts and Chinese social media.

This multi-platform approach is not accidental—instead it
is designed for adaptability and persistence. Content is
reshaped into different formats—videos, articles, memes, and
even AI-generated content—allowing threat actors to reach
audiences in different ways. Russian operations also tailor
their strategy to regional trends in platform consumption—the
use of websites and X dominate in western parts of Europe,
while Telegram, impersonated domains and inauthentic news
networks are more prevalent in the east. A notable trend is
the expansion of FIMI activities to Bluesky, indicating efforts
to extend influence into emerging platforms.

When it comes to content flow within the FIMI architecture,
information laundering is a key technique for hiding the
origins of manipulative content. The process typically
begins with attributed channels producing content, which is
then repackaged, translated, and embedded into different
echo chambers by non-attributed channels. However,
laundering is not a one-way process—manipulative content
can also originate from obscure sources and gradually
filter through layers of dissemination, eventually reaching
state-controlled outlets, where it gains legitimacy on a
global scale. As content moves through these stages,
it becomes increasingly difficult to trace. By blurring its
origins and passing through multiple intermediaries, FIMI
operations ensure that narratives gain traction while avoiding
direct attribution.

Patterns of interaction within the FIMI
architecture

At times, FIMI threat actors are highly adaptable while
maintaining broader strategic goals. To ensure manipulative
content flows effectively, different segments of the FIMI
architecture need to interact in various ways:

                                     Transmission of a FIMI incident

    NON ATTRIBUTED                                                      ATTRIBUTED

    STATE-ALIGNED CHANNELS                           STATE-LINKED    STATE-CONTROLLED  STATE OFFICIAL
                                                     CHANNELS        OUTLETS    CHANNELS

    COVERT                                                                      OVERT
                                                                     SPUTAIK
    31/03/2024    01/04/2024      02/04/2024
    New Youtube   Article published  Amplification by
    channel       by False           known FIMI      NEWSFRONT
                  Façade outlet    Telegram

    HB£20M                                                           GE③
                                                                     POLITICS
                  CRIER                              Readooka        LIVE            E

    PimMehtbi    05/04/2024
                 Russian MFA amplified the
                 story quoting “British media”
                 UA·RU

                   03-04/04/2024
Russian FIMI non-attributed and attributed channels
       laundered the information in articles

    Figure 5: Transmission of a FIMI incident - On March 31, a newly created YouTube channel uploaded a video falsely claiming Ukrainian President
    Zelenskyy bought a £20 million villa from King Charles III. The next day, the video was embedded in an article on the False Façade outlet londoncrier.
    co.uk. Between April 2 and 4, Russian FIMI-linked Telegram channels and media such as NewsFront, Tsargrad, Readovka and Argumenty i Fakty
    republished the article. On April 4, state-affiliated media like Sputnik and @Ukraina_ru picked it up. By April 5, a Russian diplomatic account cited the
    story as a “British media” report, completing the laundering process.




Interactions between threat actors:
Reciprocal amplification

Russian and Chinese networks mutually amplify content,
reinforcing anti-Western messaging. The network analysis
shows a strategic alignment between their FIMI clusters,
primarily through cross-promotion done by statecontrolled media outlets like RIA Novosti, RT, Sputnik,
CGTN and Global Times. Moreover, Chinese diplomatic
accounts sometimes further boost Russian state-controlled
and diplomatic media, along with non-attributed Russian
campaigns like Portal Kombat. Additionally, certain nodes
engage with both sides, spreading content from channels
attributed to Russia and China.

This convergence is most evident in common narratives
targeting Western institutions and democratic processes,
often portraying Europe, the US and NATO as weak, unstable
or engaged in neocolonialism and regional provocations.
At the same time, Russian and Chinese media portray
their own leadership as strong and supported worldwide,
contrasting it with the alleged instability they associate with
Western countries. Although they employ different tactics
and distribution networks, their overall goals in shaping
global narratives align closely.
In general, we have observed ad hoc alignment between the
Chinese and Russian FIMI ecosystems, but this seems to be
mostly an opportunistic behaviour, rather than systematic.

Interactions between attributed and non-attributed
clusters: The hidden currents of FIMI

A deeper dive beneath the surface of visible threat actor
collaborations reveals hidden connections within other parts
of the FIMI architecture. What first appears as the activity
patterns of separate entities begins to show underlying
coordination, detectable through the network analysis.
These patterns follow three main strategies: coordinated
activation, content recycling, and audience segmentation
to tailor messages to specific targets. Covert operations can
blend multiple of these strategies.

One of the most frequent patterns is coordinated
activation, where multiple clusters simultaneously push
the same content, flooding the information space. In parallel,
content recycling and audience segmentation keep
previously used narratives active by adapting them to new
contexts and infiltrate into new regions. Disinformation
originally designed for one local audience is reframed
and redirected to another location. Automated translations

    Covert FIMI operations exploiting events in 2024

Attributed channels          OLYMPIC GAMES
    DOPPEL
       GANGER

                          ELECTIONS IN THE EU

      AFRICAN
     INITIATIVE
    FIMI campaigns          MOLDOVA ELECTION  Events in 2024
                             AND REFERENDUM

       PORTAL               RUSSIAN INVASION
    Non-attributed channels    OF UKRAINE
       KOMBAT

                              CONFLICTS IN
                            THE MIDDLE EAST
       FALSE
    FAÇADE/
     STORM-1516
                            DOMESTIC EVENTS
                               IN RUSSIA

      BOOSTER
       NODES                    PROTESTS
                               IN GEORGIA

    Figure 6: Covert operations and FIMI Booster nodes exploiting events in 2024




    and contextual tweaks help obscure content origins,                of fake domains designed to manipulate platform algorithms,
    making it appear organic. This pattern of behaviour is             ran sponsored ads on Meta to drive traffic to its deceptive
    particularly effective in shaping public opinion while evading     sites, and relied on large-scale CIB networks ensuring
    scrutiny, as narratives are subtly modified to resonate            widespread distribution. When the amplification occurs in
    with local audiences.                                              the comment section of accounts belonging to fact-checking
                                                                       organisations, it is known as Operation Matryoshka⁴⁰.
    Another notable trend is that state official and statecontrolled infrastructures rarely          interact with           Over time, the campaign has refined its techniques and has
    impersonated content. Instead, such content tends to               shown network resilience by adapting to takedowns by
    thrive primarily in separate echo chambers within channels         hosting providers and social media platforms. This is achieved
    that have no apparent links to a state.                            through strategies such as re-registering websites under
                                                                       different Top Level Domains (TLDs), migrating to different
    Within the network graph, covert operations emerge as              hosting providers, and using disposable CIB accounts
    central players. Beyond the visible channels, long-running         for content amplification. The campaign remains active,
    operations such as Doppelgänger, Portal Kombat, False              focusing on X and reducing its presence on Telegram
    Façade, and the African Initiative remain persistent               and Meta platforms, while extending to new platforms
    elements of the FIMI architecture. These campaigns                 like Bluesky.
    have continuously adapted their TTPs to stay relevant,
    actively trying to interfere in key events throughout 2024.        The attribution of Doppelgänger has been made possible
    Collectively, they cover almost nearly the entire FIMI kill        through the collection of technical and behavioural
    chain of TTPs—some focus on content creation, others on            indicators, enabling analysts to identify the systematic
    amplification, and some ensure a sustained presence of             repetition of attack patterns. Proprietary data has
    deceptive narratives in the information space. Their aligned       confirmed the ownership of the covert operation and
    efforts reinforce each other’s impact.                             its connections to Russian government agencies.
                                                                       Doppelgänger operates within a closed ecosystem,
    DOPPELGÄNGER                                                       functioning as a self-contained cluster with no direct
                                                                       interactions with Russian state official or state-controlled
    Doppelgänger is a FIMI campaign attributed to Russia,              sources. This insular structure suggests a hermetic
    active since mid-2022. According to data collected by              operational model, reinforcing its autonomy within the
    the EEAS, it consists of 228 domains and 25,000 CIB                broader FIMI landscape.
    networks operating across nine languages: English,
    German, French, Spanish, Turkish, Polish, Arabic, Hebrew            FALSE FAÇADE (also known as
    and Italian. The campaign has a prominent presence within           Storm-1516 and CopyCop)
    the Russian FIMI infrastructure and has been linked to 60
    documented incidents in the analysed sample.                       The False Façade operation, launched in late 2023, consists
                                                                       of a network of 230 inauthentic websites, including both
    Doppelgänger has been widely exposed by international              active and dormant domains. It operates in English, French
    organisations³⁶ and is attributed to the firms Struktura           and German, mimicking Western media by incorporating
    and the Social Design Agency (SDA). Struktura and SDA              city names from the EU, UK and US in its branding—evidence
    are companies directly funded by the Russian state and are         of its geographic focus on influencing the West. The network
    involved in interference operations aimed at undermining           has been involved in 47 recorded incidents in the sample
    democracy and eroding international support for Ukraine.           of cases. The False Façade operation⁴¹ is also known as
    Several entities and individuals associated with the campaign      Storm-1516⁴² and CopyCop⁴³ and has been exposed by
    have been sanctioned by the EU³⁷, the UK³⁸ and the US³⁹.           multiple international organisations⁴⁴.

The main objective of the Doppelgänger campaign is
to expand Russian influence globally through audience
segmentation and manipulative localised content. Initially
focused on impersonating Western news outlets and
government websites, Doppelgänger has evolved into a
multi-layered operation. It deployed networks of thousands
False Façade has become one of the most impactful
campaigns in the FIMI architecture, known for its extensive
reach and high engagement. The campaign centres around
information laundering of especially chosen content
between attributed and non-attributed sources, expanding
its scope to various regions.




Initially targeting Western support for Ukraine, False Façade
focused on disinformation aimed at Ukrainian leaders and figures
linked to Alexei Navalny. As geopolitical events unfolded, the
campaign broadened its scope to include election interferenceᵛⁱⁱ,
targeting political figures like Kamala Harris, Emmanuel Macron,
Robert Habeck and Ursula von der Leyen.

The campaign employs a bi-directional information
laundering strategy. First, selected articles from Russian
state-controlled channels are republished by the obscured
network websites, often translated into multiple languages using
AI. These articles are further amplified through other websites
and YouTube channels, giving them a façade of legitimacy.
In the reverse direction, the obscure network extracts content
from staged videos featuring actors posing as whistleblowers
or journalists. This material is repurposed into articles and
circulated through channels that interact with the Russian state
apparatus or independent outlets, sometimes appearing as
sponsored content on poorly moderated websites. Finally, the
cycle completes when the content is picked up by Russian
state-controlled media, gaining credibility and legitimacy.

False Façade’s resilience lies in its network of pre-created
websites hosted on services that ignore or evade law
enforcement requests (bulletproof hosting), making
it difficult to detect. Unlike other campaigns that recreate
domains after takedowns, False Façade prepares multiple
backup domains in advance, minimising the impact of
disruptions as replacement sites are ready to be operational.
While the core strategy remains the same, the campaign’s
amplification methods have evolved, notably using influencers
on X, some of whom openly admitted having been paid to
promote the content⁴⁵.

Connections with other clusters of the infrastructure
occur at three levels. First, False Façade's content is
disseminated by influential booster nodes, which serve
as major amplifiers of Russian content. Second, Portal
Kombat has occasionally amplified content from False
Façade, translating it into other languages. Third, in recent
months, False Façade has shown patterns of coincidence
with channels linked to the Foundation for Battle Injustice,
an organisation founded by the late Yevgeny Prigozhin,
who also established the Wagner Group and the Internet
Research Agency (IRA) troll farm. While False Façade
replicates attack patterns previously used by the Internet
Research Agency (IRA), its distribution network also
overlaps with that of the Foundation for Battle Injustice.
Though they do not launder each other’s content directly,
they rely on the same amplification network, with
Booster influencers spreading content from both False
Façade and the Foundation.

PORTAL KOMBAT

Portal Kombat (also known as the Pravda network) was
created in 2022 and operates 200 inauthentic media outlets
in 35 languages, targeting local and regional audiences
across Europe, Africa and Asia. The network expands
through language-specific websites segmented by geography
and demographics, including minority groups. Prioritising
African influence, it contrasts with False Façade, which
focuses on Western audiences. Identified in 73 incidents,
Portal Kombat relies on high-frequency automated
republication of Russian FIMI content. Initially exposed
by VIGINUM, it was traced to a firm based in Crimea⁴⁶.

Portal Kombat, originally focused on regional audiences in
Russia and Ukraine, expanded globally in 2024, registering
domains across Europe, Asia and Africa. Following the fullscale invasion of Ukraine, the campaign initially concentrated
on shaping narratives around the conflict but later broadened
its scope to include other geopolitical issues and local politics.

Rather than creating original content, Portal Kombat
relies on automated republication from selected
sources, including official Russian government entities,
state-affiliated media, Russian Telegram influencers and local
anti-establishment outlets. Despite its low popularity and
limited reach, its strategy focuses on saturating local
information spaces. Highly automated systems ensure
consistent and low-cost operation. By continuously publishing
in local languages, it gradually increases its online presence,
often appearing in search engine results at minimal cost.

While initially focusing on websites and social media
amplification via platforms like Telegram and VKontakte,
Portal Kombat began making efforts to expand its
presence on X in January 2025.

When coordinating with other covert operations, Portal
Kombat has amplified content from False Façade,
though not in a systematic or consistent manner. In contrast,
it systematically amplifies African Initiative content.

    vii     The False Façade campaign deployed interference activities targeting the 2025 German elections. These activities are not part of the analysed
            sample. Correctiv. (2025, January 24). Disinformation operation: Russian meddling in German election campaign exposed. https://correctiv.org/
            en/fact-checking-en/2025/01/24/disinformation-operation-russian-meddling-in-german-election-campaign-exposed/




AFRICAN INITIATIVE

African Initiative serves as the central hub for executing
Russian FIMI operations in Africa, some of them previously
managed by Wagner Group-affiliated entities⁴⁷. It runs 16
websites and social media channels in six languages -
English, French, Russian, Arabic, Portuguese and Spanish
- across multiple platforms and has been linked to 18
documented incidents in the sample. African Initiative has
local branches in the Sahel (Burkina Faso and Mali as well as
a correspondent in Niger). Its content is frequently republished
by Russian state-controlled media and amplified by local
outlets. Playing a key role in connecting attributed and non-attributed clusters, it acts as a bridge between Russia’s
core infrastructure and local African networks. The EU⁴⁸
has placed sanctions on African Initiative. Moreover, African
Initiative is one of the primary sources that Portal Kombat
systematically amplifies inside and outside the region.

The African Initiative case will be further examined in the
second part of the next section, which dives deeper into
three specific areas of the network graph.




    CEMENTING THE FOUNDATIONS OF RUSSIAN FIMI INFRASTRUCTURE IN
    MOLDOVA: THE OPPORTUNISTIC USE OF EVENTS

    FIMI Architecture in the Moldovan elections

    STRATEGIC REALLOCATION OF INFRASTRUCTURE  NEW ASSETS TO PENETRATE LOCAL SPACES

    Zakharova    @ukraina_ru    Russian MFA    MD24

    eadaily.com

Sputnik
Moldova

                                                                      Portal Kombat                      Attributed to Russia
                                                                         Moldova                         Non attributed
                                                                                                         Participation in
        TASS                                                                                             Frequency of involvement

    Figure 7: Zoom-in of the big network graph – Russian FIMI architecture used in the Moldovan elections

The zoom-in on Moldova illustrates            how Russia
opportunistically uses key events, such as elections, to
boost long-term interference strategies in geopolitically
significant regions. Rather than being short-term actions,
Russia uses these major events to strengthen its digital
infrastructure, ensuring Russia’s presence in Moldova
remains active beyond 2024, particularly in the lead-up
to Moldova’s 2025 Parliamentary elections.

The October–November 2024 Presidential Elections and EU
membership referendum in Moldova revealed a significant
escalation in Russia’s FIMI operations in the country as
activities intensified in response to Moldova’s EU
aspirations. In the months leading up to the elections,
Russia used a complex, multi-layered, and adaptive FIMI
infrastructure. These operations strategically combined
existing infrastructure with newly developed assets to
manipulate public opinion, destabilise the electoral process,
weaken support for President Maia Sandu, and undermine
the EU enlargement process in the region.

Four key elements defined Russia’s operations. First,
simultaneous use of covert and overt channels,
abandoning previous discretion and making its influence
efforts more visible. Second, Russian official channels
and state-controlled media intensified their role,
increasing their presence and pushing more aggressive
narratives targeting Moldova. Third, Russian FIMI
infrastructure previously used against Ukraine was
redeployed to attack Moldova, adapting networks
and narratives to a new front of interference. Fourth, a
network of new local channels acted as a backbone
for distributing content, ensuring its resonance and
credibility within local audiences and allowing its expansion
to mainstream media spaces.

Who is who in the Russian FIMI infrastructure
in Moldova

Russian FIMI operations relied on both covert and overt
channels. The strategic interactions between layers of the FIMI
infrastructure ensured that Russia’s messaging permeated
multiple platforms and spheres in the media landscape.Attributed
accounts functioned mainly as content generators seeding
narratives about Moldova’s elections and EU referendum,
while non-attributed accounts acted as amplifiers.




■  Official channels: The Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs
   and figures such as spokesperson Maria Zakharova, along
   with the Russian Ministry of Defence, were instrumental
   in setting the stage for these narratives. Their public
   statements and official communications seeded the
   initial content of the operations.

■  State-controlled outlets and state-linked channels:
   Media outlets, such as TASS, Ukraina.ru, EADailyᵛⁱⁱⁱ
   and Sputnik, with specific attention to local brands of
   these outlets such as Sputnik Moldova and its Telegram
   account, served also as key content generators. The
   first stage of amplification of content was carried out
   by attributed channels on Telegram.

■  State-aligned channels: Portal Kombat and other
   non-attributed Telegram channels were part of the
   mechanism for spreading narratives generated by
   attributed sources. These channels coordinated
   their efforts to repost and share content, ensuring
   that the narratives gained greater traction and reach.
   Key Telegram channels, with substantial followings
   and high engagement levels, exhibited peaks of
   activity, particularly during critical moments such as

   election weekends.

Russian FIMI infrastructure in Moldova:
Reused, connected and localised

Strategic reallocation of existing infrastructure

Existing attributed channels, which were previously
focused on Ukraine and the South Caucasus, such as
the Telegram channel Ukraina_ru, were     deliberately
redirected to target Moldova’s democratic processes.
This shift was supported by the mobilisation of international
Russian diplomatic channels and state-controlled
media. Russia also demonstrated a strong ability to
repurpose narratives, adapting themes traditionally
associated with Ukraine—such as allegations of organ
trafficking—and redirecting them to target Moldovan
President Maia Sandu.

Creation of new assets to penetrate local and
mainstream spaces

In the months leading up to the elections, new local media
infrastructures emerged. Some networks amplified statecontrolled content, such as the local branch of Portal
Kombat, while others, like the Moldova24 apparatus, actively
generated original content.

Portal Kombat played an active role amplifying content
from Russian-attributed sources on the Moldova’s elections
and the EU referendum. The network expanded beyond its
previous geographical focus—primarily centered on the
channel pravda-en.com and created new Moldova-focused
domains to reach Russian and Romanian-speaking
audiences. These Moldovan branches (moldova-news.
comⁱˣ, moldova.news-pravda.com, md.news-pravda.com
and pravda-md.com) mirror the global Pravda’s flooding
techniques. The automation is particularly used to amplify
content from Sputnik Moldova’s Telegram channel, one of
the most consistently booster nodes in the network.

Another emerging network of newly created channels was
Moldova 24, a group of at least 14 websites functioning as a
full-fledged media outlet with a live broadcast and TV studio
                                                   .
The IP address linked to this network has been associated
with multiple RT-affiliated websites, showing potential ties
to Russian state-controlled media. Moldova’s Information
and Security Service (SIS) ordered internet providers to block
access to the main website in the group, moldova2.online,
in response to its role in spreading manipulative content⁴⁹.

Key narratives and TTPs

Russia’s FIMI operations in Moldova aimed to undermine
democratic processes and sabotage EU enlargement by
portraying European integration as a threat to Moldova’s
economic and political sovereignty. FIMI narratives
claimed that EU membership would turn the country into a
dependent state controlled from abroad. These messages
were reinforced by election fraud allegations and leadership
delegitimisation, targeting President Maia Sandu to erode
trust in her government.

    viii     EAdaily/Eurasia Daily, together with Fondsk, Lenta, NewsFront, RuBaltic, SouthFront, Strategic Culture Foundation and Krasnaya Zvezda / Tvzvezda
             have been placed under sanctions by the EU: https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2025/02/24/three-years-of-russia-s-fullscale-invasion-and-war-of-aggression-against-ukraine-eu-adopts-its-16th-package-of-economic-and-individual-measures/
    ix       Moldova-news.com domain was registered, on the 25ᵗʰ of April, 2024, using the Russian web hosting company Reg.ru Ltd. The website uses the
             same layout and source code and shares part of the same infrastructure as over 230 domains that were previously reported as part of the Portal
             Kombat network.




A key feature of these operations was its ability to recycle
past narratives, particularly adapting those previously
used against Ukraine. Security threats and regional instability
were central themes, framing Moldova’s EU ambitions as
a danger to Russian-speaking communities and fuelling
tensions in Transnistria, deceptively portraying it as being on
the brink of military confrontation with Russia—echoing earlier
narratives used against Ukraine. Unfounded organ trafficking
accusations, previously used against Ukraine, were redirected
at Moldovan authorities, while Moldova was integrated into
existing narratives about Western exploitation in Africa,
baselessly alleging Ukrainian and Moldovan involvement in
illicit activities on the continent. This adaptability highlights
a well-coordinated effort to inflame regional tensions and
reinforce the Kremlin’s long-standing manipulative narratives.
Russia’s election interference relied on a combination
of manipulative TTPs, including AI-generated content,
monetised manipulations, falsification of documents
and information suppression. AI-assisted content was
disseminated in the form of deepfakes, such as a video
mimicking President Maia Sandu’s voice, while fabricated
documents, including forged official letters were used to
manipulate public perception. FIMI activities also leveraged
financial incentives to amplify its impact. A Telegram
chatbot was created to offer payments for distributing anti-
EU content. Additionally, false fact-checking was used
to create confusion. On election day, several networks
were mobilised to push election fraud narratives and
amplify cyber operations, including alleged cyberattacks
on Moldovan infrastructure.




    ECHOES OF INFLUENCE: INSIDE THE RUSSIAN FIMI MACHINE IN AFRICA

            Russian FIMI Architecture in Africa

    GLOBAL  LOCAL BRANCHES    LOCAL INFORMATION NETWORKS

         Booster  Portal   RT        RT        Local
    RT    Nodes  Kombat  France    Africa    amplifiers

Diplomatic    TASS                                                                       Attributed to Russia
 Accounts                                                                                Non attributed
   Sputnik       Portal    Sputnik     African                                           Participation in
International    Kombat     Africa    Initiative                                         the same incidents

    Figure 8: Zoom-in of the big network graph – Russian FIMI architecture used in Africa

This section examines how the shape of Russia’s FIMI
infrastructure in Africa in 2024 reflects a long-term, multi-layered strategy developed over recent years and how it
became embedded in the region’s information landscape.
Similar to the case on Moldova, Russia has opportunistically
used key geopolitical events to adapt and expand its
influence. In Africa, it has also capitalised on regional
political shifts, aiming to position itself as a counterpower
to the West and using information operations to challenge
EU and Western engagements in the region.

Since the EU suspended RT and Sputnik in 2022, Russia
has redirected its media efforts, significantly expanding
operations in Africa. This shift was evident the same year
with the launch of Sputnik Afrique, the editorial changes in RT
en Français, RT’s attempts to open a regional office in South
Africa⁵⁰, and the acquisition of African-related online domains,
such as rt-afrique.com, africa-rt.com, rtafrica.media and
rtafrique.online. This pattern reflects Russia’s ability to reorient
its overt media presence—compensating for restrictions in
one region by deepening its influence elsewhere.

While state-controlled media have grown, Russia’s covert
influence networks in Africa have also evolved. Following
Yevgeny Prigozhin’s death in 2023, most of the influence
operations previously controlled by the Wagner Group
were dismantled and taken over by different Russian
state actors, such as African Initiative⁵¹, marking a shift in
Russia’s covert networks in Africa. A crucial aspect of its
operations has been securing support from local and
regional clusters, effectively penetrating local information
spheres and echo chambers to amplify its narratives.

Several factors define Russia’s evolving presence in
Africa: an increased state-controlled media presence,
the adaptation of existing covert operations, a more
decentralised and bidirectional flow of content, and
stronger ties with influential local structures.

Who is who in the Russian FIMI infrastructure
in Africa

■  Official channels: The most active diplomatic accounts
   involved in FIMI operations in Africa are the Russian
   embassies in Kenya and South Africa. These accounts
   primarily act as late-stage amplifiers, pushing Russian
   positions on global topics to the continent.

■  State-controlled outlets: They operate at two levels: the
   global brand, which includes outlets like RIA Novosti, TASS,




   Russia Today France, and Sputnik, and the local branch, such
   as RT Africa and Sputnik Afrique. These local extensions bring
   the content of the global brands to the continent, particularly
   from Sputnik French- and English-language channels.

A key part of the Russian FIMI architecture in Africa
lies in its obfuscated operations, which serve as a bridge
between global and local spheres.

■  State-linked channels: Channels belonging to the African
   Initiative are instrumental in shaping anti-Western public
   opinion and advancing Russia’s geopolitical agenda in
   Africa. The organisation is taking over from Wagner’s media
   activities after Yevgeny Prigozhin’s death. Established in
   September 2023 and based in Moscow, African Initiative
   presents itself as an independent press agency while
   being run by individuals linked to Russian intelligence,
   particularly the FSB and GRU. The entity has been
   placed under sanctions by the EU⁵². The organisation
   positions itself as the primary “information bridge” between
   Russia and Africa by amplifying Kremlin narratives, using
   a combination of traditional media strategies and modern
   digital propaganda techniques.

■  State-aligned channels: Russia relies heavily on
   networks of local amplifiers to infiltrate regional echo
   chambers, leveraging a vast ecosystem of inauthentic
   websites, local social media channels and influencers.
   Some networks received payments to promote Russian
   content⁵³. While these channels remain unattributed,
   they show consistent patterns of synchronisation and
   dissemination aligned with the Kremlin’s content and
   TTPs. Channels linked to major global FIMI campaigns,
   such as the Portal Kombat infrastructure, also play a
   covert amplification role in Africa.

Russian FIMI infrastructure in Africa:
bidirectional and anchored to local
infrastructures

Two-way information laundering

On the one hand, covert FIMI operations deployed in Africa filter
and tailor content from central state-controlled outlets to local
audiences. Some of these nodes belong to African Initiative,
which manages multilingual websites and social media
accounts that channel material from state-controlled
sources, like Sputnik Afrique, into the regional information
space. This content is then further relayed by aligned local
actors, embedding Kremlin narratives into regional information
spaces, while maintaining a degree of deniability.
On the other hand, the African Initiative serves a reverse
function. Its channels generate own content that feeds
back into Russian state-controlled international media,
via Sputnik Afrique, extending its content beyond
Africa. By recycling regionally sourced narratives into
global discourse, the Russian FIMI infrastructure legitimises
intentional narratives on a global scale.

Beyond online influence, African Initiative actively engages
in offline activities, such as events, training courses
for journalists or cooperation with local associations
(such as the African Initiative Association in Burkina
Faso⁵⁴), to reinforce Russia’s strategic positioning in
Africa, particularly in the Sahel.

The Portal Kombat operation systematically amplifies
the content of the organisation. Moreover, its channels
in English and French also function as recurrent nodes
that bridge African and international clusters, selectively
amplifying content from a predefined set of sources. Beyond
this central hub, the network expands its influence through
region-specific websites to target local audiences (for
example in Algeria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the Central
African Republic, Chad, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal,
Sudan, and South Sudan).

Rooted in local information networks

Besides seeding localised content to reach out to African
audiences, Russian FIMI operations in the continent
cultivate ties with influential local structures by
leveraging a network of inauthentic news websites, social
media pages, and influencer-type entities that selectively
amplify content from Russian-attributed sourcesboth from
state-controlled media and African Initiative content. This
strategy blurs the lines between attributed and non-attributed
accounts, embedding Kremlin-aligned narratives into
regional information ecosystems. These interconnected
clusters reinforce credibility through strategic cross-linking,
thereby creating a self-sustaining amplification system.
The republished content, often detached from its original
source, is further disseminated by non-attributed local
outlets and social media channels, ensuring its widespread
reach across targeted African audiences.

Key narratives and TTPs

Russia’s FIMI operations in Africa rely on a core set of
meta-narratives designed to reshape public perception and
advance geopolitical objectives. The dominant themes portray




the West—particularly France, the US and Ukraine—as
neocolonial powers exploiting African economies and
destabilising nations in the region. These narratives often
capitalise on pre-existing anti-Western sentiment. In contrast,
Russia presents itself as an alternative reliable ally,
defending African interests against Western interference.
A key element of this strategy is framing Russia and its
mercenaries as a counterterrorism partner, while accusing
Western actors of supporting extremist groups, espionage
and military coups. Social and cultural issues are also
weaponised, with narratives depicting LGBTIQ+ rights
and gender policies as Western impositions meant to
undermine traditional values.

Since Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine, Russia has
put a heavy focus on portraying Ukraine as a neo-Nazi actor
and a sponsor of terrorism in Africa. Likewise, Moldova was
portrayed as a new front of instability, as Russia accused the
Moldovan government of aiding Ukraine in fuelling regional
destabilisation. France is also a primary target, with Russianattributed and non-attributed channels reinforcing claims that
France fuels instability in Africa. Western media, particularly
French outlets and the BBC, are framed as tools of Western
propaganda, further discrediting independent reporting.
Russian FIMI narratives also emphasise Russia’s strong
relations with regional governments and widespread African
support for its alleged “rightful fight” against NATO, Ukrainian
and Western aggressions.

Beyond the recurring strategy of flooding the information
space through both overt and covert sources, Russia’s
FIMI playbook in Africa includes other techniques. Offline
events, such as demonstrations, are frequently used to
spread narratives in multiple languages.




    CHINESE INFLUENCE-FOR-HIRE OPERATIONS

    Chinese influence-for-hire operations

    Global Times

    Booster Nodes

    Xinhua

                                                                                                         Attributed to China
                                                                                                         Non attributed
    VN Network & HaiEnergy                                                                               Participation in

    Figure 9: Zoom-in of the big network graph – Chinese FIMI activities using Public Relations companies

A zoom-in on the left part of the global network graph indicates
how Chinese state-controlled and state-aligned actors are
exploiting online services, categorised as “influence-for-hire”,
as covert networks that launder FIMI content.

The shape of the cluster hints at the fact that this
is a case of inauthentic activity. Notably, this cluster
depicts specific coordinated operations in which Chinese
state-controlled media exploit private Chinese Public
Relations (PR) companies to covertly disseminate key
state-sponsored content. These companies are part
of an information laundering scheme. The efforts rely
on dedicated networks of inauthentic websites that
masquerade as local news outlets or generic news
portals, creating the illusion of independent reporting while
serving as conduits for state propaganda. The dissemination
process is facilitated by at least three different intermediary
entities, which either provide the distributed content or
activate specific networks of websites.

This type of manipulative activity has been exposed and
documented, since at least 2022, by various investigative
organisations. In particular, two major PR and online
communication companies – namely Shanghai Haixun
Technology (Haixun) and Shenzhen Haimaiyunxiang Media
(Haimai) – have reportedly been involved in such FIMI
operations. In addition, the two PR firms have been found
to also rely on the intermediary Times Newswire, an entity
attributed to one of the PR companies by third-party research,
as the content provider for their respective activities⁵⁵.

The HaiEnergy campaign, uncovered by Mandiant⁵⁶ in
2022, found a network of at least 72 inauthentic websites,
controlled by Haixun, targeting English-speaking audiences
in Europe and the United States. Recent investigations
by the EEAS show that the campaign actually includes
at least 316 fabricated websites in total, with 140 of
these being featured in the Chinese FIMI activities
network graph.

In 2024, an investigation by the Citizen Lab uncovered a
similar campaign named Paperwall⁵⁷, which is linked to
another private PR company, Haimai. According to their
findings, Paperwall appears to consist of at least        123
inauthentic websites, targeting 30 countries across
Europe, North America and Latin America. The PR
companies maintain varying degrees of connections
with state-controlled media: some openly display their
partnerships, while others have been linked through
their infrastructure or behavioural patterns.

Haixun, the company behind the websites belonging to the
HaiEnergy campaign has openly advertised its partnership
with state-controlled media People’s Daily, Global Times
and Phoenix Television. In addition, this China-based
PR firm was previously exposed, by an investigation of




South Korea's National Cyber Security Center (NCSC)⁵⁸,
for operating inauthentic websites and advertising paid
placement of promotion articles.

On the other hand, Haimai, the company behind Paperwall
removed publicly available web banners displaying the
company’s relation with People’s Daily and Global Times, as
well as with Xinhua News Agency, China Internet Information
Center and CCTV.
At first glance, it might seem that these websites operate
independently. Nonetheless, a number of technical indicators,
such as IP addresses, Google AdSense codes and Google
Analytics codes, as well as behavioural indicators, show
how these three networks are intertwined:

■  Inauthentic websites actively republish the same
   content within a short timeframe, suggesting a strong
   coordinated effort in content dissemination.

    In 2024, EEAS investigations found a third influence-for-hire      ■  The network of websites associated with the three
    campaign, labelled as the “Volume News” (VN) network                  campaigns - HaiEnergy, Paperwall, and VNhas proven
    in the graph, centred on a yet unattributed cluster of                ties to the same intermediary entities. Intermediaries
    inauthentic websites. While these fabricated websites have            act as facilitators between PR firms and the inauthentic
    behavioural links to one of the PR firms and interact with            websites, as they operate either as content providers
    Times Newswire, they appear to belong to an unattributed              or as dissemination vehicles.
    intermediary company. This network includes at least
    142 inauthentic websites, which are represented within             ■  Both inauthentic websites and intermediaries are
    the large grey cluster in the graph.                                  associated with the PR companies. This feature
                                                                          likely testifies how the whole activity is pivoted on and
    Because of these technical and behavioural links, both                potentially coordinated by these PR firms.
    companies would be included in the fourth category of
    the FIMI Exposure Matrix, as state-aligned entities, while the     Key narratives and TTPs
    intermediary company managing VN remains unattributed.
                                                                       Content disseminated by these campaigns is originally
    Key characteristics of the network                                 published by Chinese state-controlled media, particularly in
                                                                       response to breaking news events or situations relevant to
    The larger blue nodes in the graph represent the state-            China's strategic objectives. For example, the VN network
    controlled outlets Global Times and Xinhua, connected to           was utilised in an incident targeting Taiwan. The Chinese
    a network of inauthentic websites (in grey) managed by the         state-controlled outlet Global Times initially published an
    VN intermediary. The inauthentic websites composing                article in English, relaying Chinese propaganda narratives,
    this cluster systematically republish certain articles             suggesting that a speech made by the President of Taiwan
    by Global Times.                                                   Lai Ching-te on the annual “Double Tenth” day was a
                                                                       provocative act against China and that Taiwan is exploited
    To enhance their perceived legitimacy, these websites              by the United States. Following the initial publication of the
    apply various manipulative techniques. Certain fabricated          Global Times article, the same content was republished by
    domains develop localised branding, featuring specific cities      140 websites of the VN network and others associated with
    or countries in their naming, while others cover a range of        HaiEnergy. Similarly, this network was used to redistribute
    topics such as sports, tech, or fashion, combined with the         content from Xinhua, but this time without mentioning the
    republication of articles coming from legitimate news entities     original source.
    or news aggregators.
                                                                       One key pattern among these websites is that once
    Building on their alleged legitimacy, the inauthentic websites     inauthentic sites are activated to publish content, the same
    are deployed to reshare content produced by Chinese state-         article quickly spreads across a multitude of websites
    controlled media by either mentioning the original source          belonging to HaiEnergy and the VN network campaign.
    or concealing it. In the respective cluster visualising this       The distribution depends on which intermediary or PR firm
    activity, content was republished in the English language.         was activated to trigger content amplification. The overall
                                                                       web infrastructure of the network is then obfuscated by
    According to previous reports and EEAS investigations,             exploiting bulletproof hosting, such as Amazon services,
    sometimes these portals also disseminate “original”                where most of VN network websites shown in the cluster
    content aligned with Chinese state-aligned narratives.             are now hosted. This modus operandi enables the Chinese




FIMI ecosystem to maintain a degree of plausible deniability
while reaching international audiences.

While the further social media amplification of these articles
is difficult to assess, it can be assumed that the reliance
of the Chinese FIMI ecosystem on large networks used to
republish their content is mainly aimed at influencing news
search results over certain topics. Besides, the potential
impact of these FIMI activities does not derive from the
content performance metrics associated with individual
websites, but from the capabilities to mobilise networks to
conduct information manipulation activities during active
crises and significant real-world events.

Overall, this network is an example of systematic efforts
by Chinese state-controlled media and their associated
channels to pursue a long-term integration of Chinese FIMI
narratives into public online discourse.




   CONCLUSIONS

The 3ʳᵈ EEAS Report on FIMI Threats introduces the FIMI
Exposure Matrix as a crucial component of the EEAS
counter FIMI methodology. By categorising and establishing
the linkages between attributed and non-attributed channels
in this complex network, the model not only helps to identify
and understand the extensive online architecture used in
FIMI operations, it can also help to reveal the actors behind
these coordinated and harmful activities.

This is an important step in moving towards a more strategic
and targeted monitoring of FIMI, empowering counter-
FIMI practitioners and policy-makers to reinforce
preparedness and sharpen the responses to FIMI. By
helping the FIMI defenders community gather stronger
evidence, it becomes possible to attribute previously
unidentified FIMI networks and impose costs on perpetrators,
such as public exposure, sanctions, and other restrictive
measures. This methodological innovation presents a step
forward in holding FIMI actors accountable for their
malign activities.

Based on this analytical instrument, the report presents
a comprehensive analysis of the architecture of FIMI
operations deployed by Russia and China. Using a sample
of 505 FIMI incidents, involving a vast web of some 38,000
channels, it provides unique insights into the structure and
dynamics of interconnected FIMI networks. This result
builds on years of dedicated work by the FIMI defender
community, whose efforts in exposing FIMI campaigns such
as Doppelgänger, Portal Kombat and False Façade have
gradually pieced together a more comprehensive and
nuanced understanding of FIMI information ecosystems.
The examples of Moldova and Sub-Saharan Africa illustrate
how foreign actors make use of this infrastructure to attain
very concrete political and strategic aims, expanding their
geopolitical influence while seeking to undermine and
destabilise the EU and its partners.

Looking ahead, it is very likely that covert networks
and non-attributed channels, which make up a sizeable
majority (76.5%) of the channels investigated in this report,
will continue to play a central role in FIMI operations.
The Matrix provides an important step forward in addressing
this challenge, allowing for the attribution of previously non-attributed channels. However, completing the FIMI puzzle
will require integrating FIMI analysis with other sources of
intelligence, such as cyber threat intelligence (CTI), as was
highlighted in the 2ⁿᵈ EEAS report on FIMI Threats in 2023.

In an increasingly hostile geopolitical landscape, the use
of FIMI has become a key component of hybrid activities.
FIMI actors systematically exploit global crises and
global events to conduct their FIMI operations, being a
relatively low-cost option for shaping and manipulating
public opinion towards their geopolitical objectives. The
analysis of FIMI operations presented in this report
reaffirms that FIMI is not a sporadic tool of influence,
but a strategic instrument embedded in the foreign
policy toolbox of threat actors.

FIMI is a security threat to the EU and partners across
the world, which can only be addressed through a
comprehensive and whole-of-society response—there
is no single solution capable of fully addressing the risks it
poses. Ongoing conflicts and geopolitical tensions further
aggravate these challenges, exposing new vulnerabilities
that demand urgent and coordinated action by democracies
across the globe.

Fighting FIMI must remain a priority for the EU and
its partners, requiring continuous adaptation and
stronger international cooperation to protect democratic
institutions and the integrity of a free, diverse and open
information space. The EEAS will continue addressing the
challenges of FIMI and developing responses to it, in close
cooperation with EU Member States, European Institutions
and partners worldwide, including the G7 and NATO. The
tireless work of civil society organisations, independent
journalists and fact-checkers to uphold information integrity
and protect fundamental freedoms in an increasingly
challenging geopolitical context remains crucial for the
long-term resilience of democracies worldwide. Support
for, and cooperation with, these FIMI defenders will
remain central to the EEAS efforts to counter this threat.







REFERENCES

1      European External Action Service (EEAS) (2021) Tackling                      14  VIGINUM. (2025). Artificial intelligence and the information threat: Risks
       Disinformation, Foreign Information Manipulation and Interference.               and opportunities in the fight against information manipulation. https://
       Stratcom Activity Report. https://www.eeas.europa.eu/eeas/2021-                  www.sgdsn.gouv.fr/files/files/Publications/20250207_NP_SGDSN
       stratcom-activity-report-strategic-communication-task-forces-                15  - EUvsDisinfo. (2023). Twists and turns: Georgian Dream rhetoric
       andinformation-analysis-division_en                                              on the EU. Retrieved from https://euvsdisinfo.eu/twists-and-turns-
2      Introduction to STIX™. https://oasis-open.github.io/cti-documentation/           georgian-dream-rhetoric-on-the-eu/
       stix/intro                                                                       - EUvsDisinfo. (2023). Elections in Poland through the prism of
3      Pols, P. (2023) The Unified Kill Chain: Raising Resilience Against               Lukashenka regime’s propaganda. Retrieved from https://euvsdisinfo.
       Advanced Cyber Attacks. White Paper. https://www.unifiedkillchain.               eu/elections-in-poland-through-the-prism-of-lukashenka-regimescom/assets/The-Unified-Kill-Chain.pdf                                            propaganda/
4      European External Action Service (EEAS) (2022) A Strategic Compass               - EUvsDisinfo. (2024). Doppelganger strikes back: Unveiling FIMI
       for Security and Defence: For a European Union that protects its                 activities targeting European Parliament elections. Retrieved from
       citizens, values and interests and contributes to international peace and        https://euvsdisinfo.eu/doppelganger-strikes-back-unveiling-fimisecurity. https://www.eeas.europa.eu/eeas/strategic-compasssecurity-             activities-targeting-european-parliament-elections/
       and-defence-1_en                                                                 - EUvsDisinfo. (2024). Russian experiments with disinformation in
5      Arcos, Rubén & Arribas, Cristina M. (2023). Anticipatory Approaches              Moldova. Retrieved from https://euvsdisinfo.eu/russian-experimentsto Disinformation,  Warning    and       Supporting Technologies.                with-disinformation-in-moldova/
       10.4324/9781003190363-34.                                                        - EUvsDisinfo. (2025). Another election, another Kremlin interference
6      European External Action Service (EEAS) (February 2023) 1st EEAS                 attempt. Retrieved from https://euvsdisinfo.eu/another-election-another-
       Report on Foreign Information Manipulation and Interference Threats              kremlin-interference-attempt/
       - Towards a framework for networked defence https://www.eeas.                16  - The Moscow Times. (2024). 2,6 миллиарда рублей в неделю. Россия
       europa.eu/eeas/1st-eeas-report-foreign-information-manipulation-                 увеличит расходы на госпропаганду до нового исторического
       and-interference-threats_en                                                      рекорда. Retrieved from https://www.moscowtimes.ru/2024/10/07/26-
7      European External Action Service (EEAS) (February 2024) 2nd                      milliarda-rublei-vnedelyu-rossiya-uvelichit-rashodi-nagospropagandu-
       EEAS Report on Foreign Information Manipulation and Interference                 donovogo-istoricheskogo-rekorda-a144152
       Threats - A framework for networked defence https://www.eeas.                    - Euromaidan Press. (2024). Biden postpones trip to Ramstein
       europa.eu/eeas/2nd-eeas-report-foreign-information-manipulation-                 in Germany due to hurricane threat. Retrieved from https://
       and-interference-threats_en                                                      euromaidanpress.com/2024/10/08/biden-postpones-trip-to-ramstein-
8      European Council. (2015). European Council conclusions, 19-20                    in-germany-due-to-hurricane-threat/
       March 2015. Council of the European Union. https://www.consilium.            17  - Thomson Foundation. (2024). AI disinformation attacks in Taiwan.
       europa.eu/media/21888/european-council-conclusions-19-20-march-                  Retrieved from https://www.thomsonfoundation.org/media/268943/
       2015-en.pdf                                                                      ai_disinformation_attacks_taiwan.pdf
9      European External Action Service (EEAS) (2023) 1st EEAS Report                   - U.S. Department of State. (2024). Protecting the 2024 election from
       on Foreign Information Manipulation and Interference Threats -                   foreign malign influence. Retrieved from https://2021-2025.state.gov/
       Towards a framework for networked defence https://www.eeas.                      briefings-foreign-press-centers/protecting-the-2024-election-fromeuropa.eu/eeas/1st-eeas-report-foreign-information-manipulation-                 foreign-malign-influence
       and-interference-threats_en                                                      - Graphika. (2024). The Americans. Retrieved from https://public-assets.
10     European External Action Service (EEAS) (2024) 2nd EEAS Report                   graphika.com/reports/graphika-report-the-americans.pdf
       on Foreign Information Manipulation and Interference Threats -                   - Digital Forensic Research Lab (DFRLab). (2024). China-U.S.
       A framework for networked defence https://www.eeas.europa.                       election interference. Retrieved from https://dfrlab.org/2024/11/04/
       eu/eeas/2nd-eeas-report-foreign-information-manipulation-and-                    china-us-election-interference/
       interference-threats_en                                                      18  - Global Times. (2024). Beijing leads battle for influence. Retrieved
11     Arcos, Rubén & Arribas, Cristina M. (2023). Anticipatory Approaches              from https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202406/1313672.shtml
       to Disinformation,  Warning    and       Supporting Technologies.                - BBC News. (2024). China's mission to win African hearts with satellite
       10.4324/9781003190363-34.                                                        TV. Retrieved from https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c5y3qk9p2elo
12     European External Action Service. (2024). Strategic Compass: Second-         19  Africa Confidential. (2024). Beijing leads battle for influence. Retrieved
       year report. European Union. https://www.eeas.europa.eu/sites/default/           from https://www.africa-confidential.com/article/id/15159/beijing-leadsfiles/documents/2024/StrategicCompass_2ndYear_Report_0.pdf                       battle-for-influence
13     European External Action Service (EEAS) (2024) 2nd EEAS Report               20  Citizen Lab. (2024). Paperwall: Chinese websites posing as local news
       on Foreign Information Manipulation and Interference Threats -                   outlets target global audiences with pro-Beijing content. Retrieved
       A framework for networked defence https://www.eeas.europa.                       from https://citizenlab.ca/2024/02/paperwall-chinese-websites-posingeu/eeas/2nd-eeas-report-foreign-information-manipulation-and-                    as-local-news-outlets-with-pro-beijing-content/
       interference-threats_en                                                      21  - China Media Project. (2024). The local game of global propaganda.
                                                                                        Retrieved from https://chinamediaproject.org/2024/02/29/going-localwith-the-global-propaganda-game/




    - China Media Project. (2024). More local centers for global propaganda.
    Retrieved from https://chinamediaproject.org/2024/06/12/more-localcenters-for-global-propaganda/
22  U.S. Government Publishing Office. (2024). Congressional hearing
    transcript. Retrieved from https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG-
    118jhrg53487/pdf/CHRG-118jhrg53487.pdf
23  Africa Center for Strategic Studies. (2024). China’s strategy to shape
    Africa’s media space. Retrieved from https://africacenter.org/spotlight/
    china-strategy-africa-media-space/
24  European External Action Service (EEAS) (2024) 2nd EEAS Report
    on Foreign Information Manipulation and Interference Threats -
    A framework for networked defence https://www.eeas.europa.
    eu/eeas/2nd-eeas-report-foreign-information-manipulation-andinterference-threats_en
25  Council of the European Union. (2025). Three years of Russia's fullscale invasion and war of aggression against Ukraine: EU adopts
    its 16th package of economic and individual measures. https://www.
    consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2025/02/24/three-yearsof-russia-s-full-scale-invasion-and-war-of-aggression-against-ukraineeu-adopts-its-16th-package-of-economic-and-individual-measures/
26  Pamment, J. (2020) The EU’s Role in Fighting Disinformation:
    Crafting a Disinformation Framework. Working Paper of the Carnegie
    Endowment for International Peace. https://carnegieendowment.org/
    research/2020/09/the-eus-role-in-fighting-disinformation-crafting-adisinformation-framework
28  European External Action Service (EEAS) (2023) 1st EEAS Report
    on Foreign Information Manipulation and Interference Threats -
    Towards a framework for networked defence https://www.eeas.
    europa.eu/eeas/1st-eeas-report-foreign-information-manipulationand-interference-threats_en
29  Goel, Sanjay & Nussbaum, Brian. (2021). Attribution Across Cyber
    Attack Types: Network Intrusions and Information Operations.
    IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society. 2. 1082-1093.
    10.1109/OJCOMS.2021.3074591. https://www.researchgate.net/
    publication/351772839_Attribution_Across_Cyber_Attack_Types_
    Network_Intrusions_and_Information_Operations
30  Introduction to STIX™. https://oasis-open.github.io/cti-documentation/
    stix/intro
32  - U.S. Department of State. (2021) Russia’s pillars of disinformation
    and propaganda. U.S. Department of State. https://2017-2021.state.
    gov/russias-pillars-of-disinformation-and-propaganda-report/
    - Palmertz, B., Isaksson, E., & Pamment, J. (2025). A framework for
    attribution of information influence operations. Project Adac.io. https://
    adacio.eu/a-framework-for-attribution-of-information-influence-operations
    - Stratcom Centre of Excellence. (2020). Attributing information
    influence operations: Identifying those responsible for malicious
    behaviour online. NATO Strategic Communications Centre of
    Excellence. https://stratcomcoe.org/publications/attributing-informationinfluence-operations-identifying-those-responsible-for-maliciousbehaviour-online/244
    - Canadian Global Affairs Institute. (2021). Addressing attribution:
    Theorizing a model to identify Russian disinformation campaigns online.
    Canadian Global Affairs Institute. https://www.cgai.ca/addressing_
    attribution_theorizing_a_model_to_identify_russian_disinformation_
    campaigns_online#Defining
    - DFRLab. (2024). DFRLab launches the 2024 foreign interference
    attribution tracker. DFRLab. https://dfrlab.org/2024/10/23/dfrlablaunches-fiat-2024/
    - Central European University. The state of state media. CEU.
    https://cmds.ceu.edu/sites/cmcs.ceu.hu/files/attachment/article/2091/
    thestateofstatemedia.pdf
34  Innes, M., & Ahonen, A. (2025). Attribution and information influence
    operations: A “field guide” for open-source investigators and researchers.
    Project Adac.io. https://adacio.eu/attribution-and-information-influenceoperations-a-field-guide-for-open-source-investigators-and-researchers
35  Egloff, F. J., & Smeets, M. (2021). Publicly attributing cyber attacks:
    a framework. Journal of Strategic Studies, 46(3), 502–533. https://
    doi.org/10.1080/01402390.2021.1895117
36  - European External Action Service (EEAS). G7 Rapid Response
    Mechanism: Statement on Russian influence campaign. Retrieved
    from https://www.eeas.europa.eu/eeas/g7-rapid-response-mechanismrrm-statement-russian-influence-campaign_en
    - EU DisinfoLab. Doppelgänger operation. Retrieved from https://
    www.disinfo.eu/doppelganger-operation/
    - Viginium. (2023). RRN: Une campagne numérique de manipulation
    de l’information complexe et coordonnée. Retrieved from https://
    www.sgdsn.gouv.fr/publications/maj-19062023-rrn-une-campagnenumerique-de-manipulation-de-linformation-complexe-et
    - EUvsDisinfo. (2024). Doppelgänger strikes back: Unveiling FIMI
    activities targeting European Parliament elections. Retrieved from
    https://euvsdisinfo.eu/doppelganger-strikes-back-unveiling-fimiactivities-targeting-european-parliament-elections/
    - Digital Forensic Research Lab (DFRLab). (2024). Doppelgänger: US
    election. Retrieved from https://dfrlab.org/2024/09/18/doppelgangerus-election/
    - Reset. (2024) Reset Tech investigation: Doppelgänger. Retrieved
    from https://www.reset.tech/resources/reset-tech-investigationdoppelganger/
38  UK Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office. (2024). UK
    sanctions Putin's interference actors. https://www.gov.uk/government/
    news/uk-sanctions-putins-interference-actors
39  U.S. Department of Justice. (2024) Justice Department disrupts
    covert Russian government-sponsored foreign malign influence




    operations. Retrieved from https://www.justice.gov/archives/opa/pr/
    justice-department-disrupts-covert-russian-government-sponsoredforeign-malign-influence
40  Viginium. (2023) Matriochka: Une campagne prorusse ciblant les
    médias et la communauté des fact-checkers. Retrieved from https://
    www.sgdsn.gouv.fr/publications/matriochka-une-campagne-prorusseciblant-les-medias-et-la-communaute-des-fact-checkers
41  EUvsDisinfo. (2024) Building a false façade. Retrieved from https://
    euvsdisinfo.eu/building-a-false-facade/
42  - Warren, Patrick; Linvill, Darren; Sheffield, Steven; Fecher, Leland; Gilbert,
    Kylie; Greco, Jonathon; Gubanich, Alexa; Gubanich, Janna; Hundley,
    Parker; Kea, Ella; Manson, Claire; May, Ethan; Meadows, Sarah; Pridnia,
    Connor; Rippy, Matthew; Rockow, Miles; Ross, Timothy; and Webb,
    Phebe, "Writers of the Storm: Who's Behind the Ongoing Production of
    Pro-Russian False Narratives" (2024). Media Forensics Hub Creative
    Inquiry Reports. 10. https://open.clemson.edu/mfh_ci_reports/10
    - Microsoft. (2024). Russia’s US election interference: Deepfakes and
    AI. Microsoft On the Issues. Retrieved from https://blogs.microsoft.com/
    on-the-issues/2024/04/17/russia-us-election-interference-deepfakes-ai/
    - Microsoft. (2024). Russian election interference efforts focus on
    the Harris-Walz campaign. Microsoft On the Issues. Retrieved from
    https://blogs.microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2024/09/17/russian-electioninterference-efforts-focus-on-the-harris-walz-campaign/
43  Recorded Future. Russia-linked CopyCop uses LLMs to weaponize
    influence content at scale. Retrieved from https://www.recordedfuture.
    com/research/russia-linked-copycop-uses-llms-to-weaponize-influencecontent-at-scale
44  Newsweek. (2024). How a fugitive Florida deputy sheriff became
    a Kremlin disinformation impresario. Retrieved from https://www.
    newsweek.com/how-fugitive-florida-deputy-sheriff-became-kremlindisinformation-impresario-1911555
45  Warren, Patrick; Linvill, Darren; Sheffield, Steven; Fecher, Leland; Gilbert,
    Kylie; Greco, Jonathon; Gubanich, Alexa; Gubanich, Janna; Hundley,
    Parker; Kea, Ella; Manson, Claire; May, Ethan; Meadows, Sarah; Pridnia,
    Connor; Rippy, Matthew; Rockow, Miles; Ross, Timothy; and Webb,
    Phebe, "Writers of the Storm: Who's Behind the Ongoing Production of
    Pro-Russian False Narratives" (2024). Media Forensics Hub Creative
    Inquiry Reports. 10. https://open.clemson.edu/mfh_ci_reports/10
46  Viginium. Portal Kombat: Suite des investigations sur le réseau
    structuré et coordonné. Retrieved from https://www.sgdsn.gouv.fr/
    publications/portal-kombat-suite-des-investigations-sur-le-reseaustructure-et-coordonne-de
47  The New York Times. (2023). Prigozhin’s Africa ambitions: A mix of
    mercenaries and propaganda. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.
    com/2023/09/08/world/europe/prigozhin-wagner-russia-africa.html
49  On 02/10/2024, the Security and Intelligence Service of the Republic
    of Moldova issued notice no. E/10568 blocking the access to the
    websites moldova24.online and pwa.moldova24.online:
    - Radio Europa Liberă Moldova. (2024). Cel mai mare motor de
    căutare rusesc – Yandex și un canal TV afiliat cu Șor, blocate în R.
    Moldova.. Retrieved from https://moldova.europalibera.org/a/cel-maimare-motor-de-cautare-rusesc-yandex-si-un-canal-tv-afiliat-cu-sorblocate-in-r-moldova/33145883.html
    - Moldova Invest. (2024). The Intelligence and Security Service of
    the Republic of Moldova seeks to block several Russian websites to
    combat disinformation. Retrieved from https://moldovainvest.eu/en/
    international-en/chisinau-en/the-intelligence-and-security-service-ofthe-republic-of-moldova-seeks-to-block-several-russian-websites-tocombat-disinformation/
50  Bloomberg. (2022). Banned in Europe, Kremlin-Backed RT Channel
    Turns to Africa. Retrieved from https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
    articles/2022-07-22/banned-in-europe-kremlin-backed-rt-channelturns-to-africa
51  The New York Times. (2023). Prigozhin’s Africa ambitions: A mix of
    mercenaries and propaganda. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.
    com/2023/09/08/world/europe/prigozhin-wagner-russia-africa.html
53  Forbidden Stories. (2024). In the Central African Republic, a
    former propagandist lifts the veil on the inner workings of Russian
    disinformation. https://forbiddenstories.org/in-the-central-africanrepublic-a-former-propagandist-lifts-the-veil-on-the-inner-workingsof-russian-disinformation/
54  - Le Monde. (2024). African Initiative, the new bridgehead for Russian
    propaganda in Africa. Retrieved from https://www.lemonde.fr/en/lemonde-africa/article/2024/03/09/african-initiative-the-new-bridgeheadfor-russian-propaganda-in-africa_6599556_124.html
    - African Digital Democracy Observatory (2024). African Initiative:
    Russia’s new mouthpiece in Africa. https://disinfo.africa/africaninitiative-russias-new-mouthpiece-in-africa-65aa76fcc255
55  Citizen Lab (2024). Paperwall: Chinese websites posing as local
    news outlets target global audiences with pro-Beijing content. https://
    citizenlab.ca/2024/02/paperwall-chinese-websites-posing-as-localnews-outlets-with-pro-beijing-content/
56  Google Cloud Threat Intelligence (2024). Pro-PRC “HaiEnergy”
    Information Operations Campaign Leverages Infrastructure from
    Public Relations Firm to Disseminate Content on Inauthentic News
    Sites. Retrieved from https://cloud.google.com/blog/topics/threatintelligence/pro-prc-information-operations-campaign-haienergy/
57  Citizen Lab. (2024). Paperwall: Chinese websites posing as local news
    outlets target global audiences with pro-Beijing content. Retrieved
    from https://citizenlab.ca/2024/02/paperwall-chinese-websites-posingas-local-news-outlets-with-pro-beijing-content/
58  South Korea's National Cyber Security Center (NCSC). (2023).
    China's Malign Activities by Exploiting "Fake News websites" https://
    www.ncsc.go.kr:4018/cmm/fms/PdfFileView.do?uuid=f11416c2-5a6d-
    4398-a0c4-f0a3b9c611f2&fileSn=0




REPORT ON FIMI THREATS / March 2025    EU vs
                                       EEAS

DiSiNFO
Articles  Database  Learn  Research

O
euvsdisinfo.eu
f in          v


European Union
EXTERNAL ACTION